Framing and re-framing: Core skills for a problem-filled world

The capacity to re-frame problems distinguishes Design Thinking from its analytical problem-solving counterparts.

The rapidly-growing body of literature on Design Thinking, both academic and practitioner, exhorts readers to engage in a path of activities involving some version of Tim Brown’s ‘inspiration/ideation/  implementation’ model.  Little of that literature, however, focuses explicitly on what we consider to be the core underlying benefit of Design Thinking: the enhanced capacity to frame and re-frame the problem to be solved.

The more linear and analytic processes to which we’ve become accustomed through quality management and Six Sigma training rarely open up the number of different frames that the more exploratory approaches of Design Thinking can.  Suppose, for example, that I asked you to build me a bridge.  The problem solver in you might jump right in, asking how far it is across the river, what sits on either side, and which type of bridge (cantilever, suspension, etc.) would work best.

In the Design Thinking world, however, you would first step back and ask, Why do we need this bridge?  Well, suppose I say that people need to get to the other side of the river.  Now your mind bursts with a set of other alternatives: a boat, a tunnel, a wetsuit, a zipline.  And, if you ask why again, you might find that I want to get a message to the other side.  Suddenly that large investment you might have made in a bridge can be significantly reduced by instead facilitating my sending an email, floating a message in a bottle, yelling through a megaphone, and so on.  

Lesson 1: Sometimes we need many different frames around a problem in order to see the many different possible solutions. 

Understanding the ‘why ’ that sits beneath a stated problem can lead to a wide range of other options for solving it.  Root-cause analysis, or the asking of the ‘five whys’, from quality management, also helps to identify a broader range of potential frames for a problem. But Design Thinking takes re-framing a step farther.

Suppose you are working on a problem that simply cannot be solved as it is currently framed.  Shure, the microphone company, recognized the catastrophic hearing loss that its rock-star customers were experiencing as a result of the on-stage ‘wedge’ speakers that were throwing deafening sound back at them.  It dug into the problem, imagining a variety of ways in which it might provide hearing protection to its customers.  As you might imagine, all of its solutions met with disdain, as few rock performers wanted to be lumped in with the types of ‘damaged people’ they imagined wore hearing aids. “I’m a rock god—not somebody’s old grandfather!”

It wasn’t until Shure spent significant time in the field with both garage bands and high-end performers that it came to re-frame the problem: how might we improve ‘personal stage monitoring’?  By framing the in-ear monitor not as hearing protection, but as a device that could actually improve performance, they created a solution that protected hearing, but was also desired by the performers.  The new design was so powerful that it was adapted by Apple for all of its headphones.  

Lesson 2: Sometimes we can’t solve problems as they are framed; we need an altogether different frame.

Then there are hugely complex systems problems, in which there are many interacting elements that all have to work together in order for a problem to be solved.  Redesigning health care delivery or figuring out how to handle climate change are well-known wicked problems; but creating well-integrated customer or user experiences can also be seen as systems problems. The challenge is helping those seeking solutions to hold the entire system in mind at once, and here, the framing provided by metaphors is helpful. 

Ten years ago, Wrigley wanted to learn about how it might change gum consumption in China from ‘a pleasant-but-infrequent confection’ into ‘an important daily breath freshener’.  Through deep user research, it began to learn about the complexities and subtleties of the user experience: about how gum is shared, which has implications for packaging design; about the role breath plays in building social confidence (in all courtship situations both personal and professional), which has implications for product advertising; and, finally, about the total inability of the Chinese to openly talk about having ‘bad breath’, which had implications for the entire product category.  

To pull together the disparate elements of the user experience around freshening breath, Wrigley needed a metaphor that could transcend the taboo of bad breath. Doors are extremely important in China, so they connected chewing Wrigley Doublemint to the symbol of ‘door-opening confidence’.  They aligned all aspects of Doublemint’s  use, usability and meaning through new product packaging that addressed ‘controlled sharing’, and advertising that humorously portrayed professional doors magically opening in the presence of Doublemint ‘double arrow’ gum. Within two years of these changes, Wrigley’s gum sales increased 13 per cent, making China its largest international consumer.

Lesson 3: Sometimes we need metaphorical frames to help us hold all the elements of a wicked problem together and to see how a change in one element can affect others.

In short, Design Thinking drives the identification of alternative frames, and that in turn allows for the identification of alternative solutions. Peter Senge called these frames ‘mental models’, which are defined as, “The images, assumptions and stories we carry in our minds of ourselves, other people, institutions, and every aspect of the world. Like a pane of glass framing and subtly distorting our vision, mental models determine what we see.”

What explicitly does Design Thinking suggest as means of identifying or seeing alternative frames?  We like to think about it as a process of ‘stories in’ and ‘stories out’.

Stories in. These stories come directly from customers, and allow us to surface contradictions, spoken and unspoken norms, workarounds, and the successes and failures that are core to really understanding their needs. In short, they help us understand our customers’ mental models or frames, which in turn often help us understand our own.  Through a dozen or so interviews, a design team might collect hundreds of stories; it then sorts through them to identify interesting patterns, opportunities for change or improvement, and the stories around which new stories can be crafted. 

Stories out. Emanating from the design process, these are the stories that motivate the team to imagine new and interesting solutions and, when told outside of the company, inspire customers and users to participate in the new story. The most inspiring stories appear to follow three primary dramatic plot structures, as described by Chip and Dan Heath in Made to Stick: the challenge plot, the connection plot and the creativity plot. All three are developed in a highly iterative fashion as the design team plays with the data (including stories in) it has gathered, extracts meaningful insights from that data, frames and reframes what problem it should be solving for customers, and then generates alternative solutions to that problem.

Following are four skills that drive the identification and creation of frames by enhancing our ability to grasp the stories coming in and create the stories going out.

1. Developing empathy

At the heart of Design Thinking, which is often referred to as user- or human-centered design, is developing a deep understanding of customer and user needs. This requires a basic interest in, curiosity about and empathy for customers, to elicit and capture their stories.  Having empathy, in turn, entails identifying assumptions, particularly assumptions made about the customers, about how they live their lives and about the culture within which they live and work. 

For over 20 years, we have taught design-related topics at Stanford’s Hasso Plattner Institute of Design and the University of California at Berkeley’s Haas School of Business. One of the exercises we asks students to write a paragraph describing a photo, and then to share their paragraphs with one another. Students are regularly amazed at the vast differences between their interpretations of the same photo:  some describe it in ‘police report’ format, with full detail; others tell a story.  They all infer—based on assumptions they hold about the world and how it works—different things from the facts shown in the photo.  For example, Is that really an album cover for a famous band, or is it four men who have just robbed a convenience store?  

Just as the students have to uncover the underlying assumptions they use to interpret the photo, we must unearth the underlying assumptions we make as we observe and interact with customers.  Identifying our assumptions is far from trivial.  You might have heard  the story about two young fish swimming along. An older fish passes them and calls out, ‘how’s the water?’, which puzzles the younger fish. ‘Water, what the heck is water?’ they ask one another. Identifying the ‘water’ in which we swim, and the ‘water’ in which our customers or users swim, leads us to seeing new and different frames.

This ability to put yourself in another’s shoes is critical to framing problems so that they can be solved.  Yet, in our research using David Kolb’s Experiential Learning Theory, we’ve learned that only about one-to two per cent of our students have the ‘diverging’ learning style associated with this skill set. More instruction and practice in how to be more sensitive to the feelings and values of others and how to listen with an open mind is needed to develop the empathy that allows for ‘walking a mile in customers’ shoes’, and thus seeing and embracing new frames.

2.Getting to why?

This is perhaps the most difficult part of the problem-framing process. In effect, it requires that you identify the most important ‘theme’ for the story that the customer is living today (the story-in), which in turn will allow it to choose a theme for the new story you will tell (the story- out). That theme, in turn, will drive all the other elements of the ‘plot’. In other words, it will determine the solution set that is generated and the choice of solutions to be delivered. 

While observation occurs in the concrete realm, generating insights requires abstract thinking and sorting through the masses of data generated by customer observations and interviews. To return to an earlier metaphor, it requires understanding your customers’ ‘water’, and then deciding which elements of that water are most relevant and meaningful. This requires forming alternative hypotheses about what has been observed, what might be happening for the customer, and how to explain particular customer actions. 

It also entails finding patterns in ambiguous and complex data sets, extracting nuggets of information from customer stories, and finding the stories that reveal commonly-shared interests or concerns.  For example, understanding the strong motivation of musicians to ‘sound great’ on stage or in the garage was at the heart of the frame shift for Shure. 

Choosing a theme is all about framing the problem to be solved (or the opportunity to be leveraged) and often requires examining the problem at multiple levels of abstraction before selecting the right ‘view’.  Charles and Ray Eames’ video Powers of 10 brings this notion alive. The video starts with a shot of a couple enjoying a picnic on the Chicago lakeshore. Each 10 seconds, the camera moves an order of magnitude farther away from the couple, eventually showing Earth, the galaxy and beyond. The lesson: finding meaningful insights requires framing and reframing problems at different levels—a process we sometimes call ‘laddering up and down’—each of which provides a different perspective on the possible solution set and thus the possibility of telling a different story for the customer.

Systems thinking and the wide variety of tools it suggests can be useful at this stage.  Some of the simplest systems views are the customer empathy map and customer journey map, both of which require stepping back and examining the customer from a more holistic perspective.  Empathy maps move beyond what people say and do to how they think and feel, while journey maps describe not only the interaction with a point solution, but all of the activities that sit around it.  Both thus provide different frames for understanding the customer’s life.

The inherent ambiguity associated with extracting insights makes many people uncomfortable, and as a result they often gravitate to findings that are obvious, but largely uninteresting. That a product should be ‘easy to use’, for example, is not a terribly interesting insight, and one that could likely have been written without doing any observation work. Our students often default to identifying insights at the levels of the use and usability of a solution rather than at the meaning level, where ultimately, more interesting innovation work can occur.  This is likely due to the fact that they are well-indoctrinated in more analytical approaches to problem framing and are thus less comfortable with synthetic approaches.

3. Generating and selecting ideas

Peter Senge has used the movie Dances with Wolves in his classroom to describe our collective need to be more divergent at times. Prof. Senge would describe the Native Americans in the movie and how they met to discuss the stranger who had come to inhabit their land. At the end of their discussions, they would say ‘This is a complex issue; we should talk some more.’ Senge contrasted this with the way in which most organizational meetings are conducted—in a highly convergent manner with conclusions drawn at the end and a list of ‘to dos’ written to take away.

In its simplest sense, diverging is the ability to come up with a wide range of alternative ideas and converging is the ability to select from among the options—or better yet to combine and refine the options to create a better one.  The catch is that you cannot do both at the same time: if you are expressing judgment as you come up with ideas, then you are attempting to converge as you diverge, which means you are not really diverging.  

Students and practitioners alike often find this dynamic balance to be very difficult. This is because managing the dynamic balance goes beyond the generation of many ideas. In the end what we are seeking is a new story that can be told on behalf of the customer and that story may well call upon a number of different ideas, pulled together into a coherent whole around a particular frame.  

Managing this dynamic balance entails leaving open the choice of a frame for the problem until enough has been learned about the implications of the alternatives to choose among them. This ability distinguishes the notion of divergence being discussed here from simpler notions of brainstorming. Brainstorming is indeed a diverging tool, but the ability to diverge and remain in a divergent state is a skill that has to be developed, and is inherently uncomfortable for those accustomed to convergence. 

In our classes, somewhere between 40 and 50 per cent of the students test as ‘converging learners’ in David Kolb’s lexicon. These students excel on standardized tests, and have learned to succeed through their ability to quickly come up with the answer to a problem, not by sitting with multiple answers and testing them.  Thus, we find ourselves challenged to keep teams from converging too quickly, and to help them to remain open to exploring alternative directions; to date, this has only been resolved through frequent faculty intervention.

4. Learning through experimentation

At the core of being able to experiment is the ability to ‘make it and break it.’ Discarding a story, idea or prototype is not an indication of failure, but simply a part of the cycle of learning.  This is the stage at which the frames chosen in prior stages are put to the test.  

This is a particularly difficult skill to teach people who are highly convergent. There is a tendency on the part of the teams composed primarily of convergers to attach themselves to the first solutions they identify, to be unwilling to then generate alternative solutions, and to have great difficulty giving up the solutions they have developed—even in the face of significant pushback from customers. In our experience, they usually have to be forced to throw away the solutions they have generated and take alternative points of view, and taught to carefully listen and respond to feedback on their first-phase prototypes or stories.

Teaching people to learn from failure requires teaching them to develop inexpensive experiments that they can run to learn about various aspects of their proposed solutions. This, in turn, requires them to think through the risks associated with their solutions, which requires a shift in mindset for many of them, from one of choosing and implementing a single solution to playing or experimenting with multiple solutions through a process of ‘successive approximation’.

To experiment, you must return to the concrete world and actually make something with which to experiment. This requires David Kolb’s accommodating learning style, in which around 10 per cent of our students fall.  Those with this style learn through hands-on experience, by trying things.  The increased focus on ‘making’, both through the Maker Movement and in many engineering schools today, aims to increase making capability, which will in turn increase the ability to experiment.

In closing

Today’s leaders are increasingly faced with the need to grapple with not only their own organizational issues, but some of the world’s wickedest problems. As indicated herein, the core skill for dealing with these problems is the ability to adequately frame and re-frame the problem before generating alternative strategies for coping with it. 

Unfortunately, much of the focus of our education system has been on having students learn how to solve problems, not frame them. 

Our experience suggests that it is possible to teach people the synthetic skills—empathy, insight generation, diverging and learning by trying—required to both take in and produce stories. We hope that this article provides some early guidance for thinking about the critical skill of problem framing.

Copyright, republished from Rotman Management, the magazine of Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto.