 TALKING
TO HUMANS
Success starts with understanding your customers
 GIFF CONSTABLE
with Frank Rimalovski illustrations by Tom Fishburne and foreword by Steve Blank
  
Copyright ©2014 Gi  Constable First edition, v1.71
All rights reserved.
Book design: Gi  Constable
Illustrations by Tom Fishburne
Cover design assistance: Jono Mallanyk
Lean Startup is trademarked by Eric Ries
Customer Discovery is a phrase coined by Steve Blank
ISBN: 978-0-9908009-0-3
Special thanks to the NYU Entrepreneurial Institute for their collaboration and support in the creation of Talking to Humans
Acclaim for Talking to Humans
“If you are teaching entrepreneurship or running a startup accelerator, you need to make it required reading for your students and teams. I have.”
Steve Blank, entrepreneur, educator and author of Four Steps to the Epiphany and The Startup Owner’s Manual
“If entrepreneurship 101 is talking to customers, this is the syllabus. Talking to Humans is a thoughtful guide to the customer informed product development that lies at the foundation of successful start-ups.”
Phin Barnes, Partner, First Round Capital
“Getting started on your Customer Discovery journey is the most important step to becoming a successful entrepreneur and reading Talking To Humans is the smartest  rst step to  nding and solving real problems for paying customers.”
Andre Marquis, Executive Director, Lester Center for Entrepreneurship University of California Berkeley
“A lot of entrepreneurs pay lip service to talking to customers but you have to know how. Talking to Humans o ers concrete examples on how to how to recruit candidates, how to conduct interviews, and how to prioritize learning from customers more through listening versus talking.”
Ash Maurya, Founder Spark59 and Author of Running Lean
“ is is a great how-to guide for entrepreneurs that provides practical guidance and examples on one of the most important and o en under practiced requirements of building a great startup—getting out of the o ce, talking directly with customers and partners, and beginning the critical process of building a community.”
David Aronoff, General Partner, Flybridge Capital
“Gi  has been one of the thought leaders in the lean startup movement from the very beginning. Entrepreneurs in all industries will  nd Talking to Humans practical, insightful, and incredibly useful.”
Patrick Vlaskovits, New York Times bestselling author of The Lean Entpreneur
“Current and future customers are the best source of feedback and insight for your new product ideas. Talking to them is intimidating and seemingly time-consuming. In this focused, practical, down-to-earth book Gi  Constable demysti es the art (not science) of customer discovery helping entrepreneurs and product veterans alike learn how to build a continuous conversation with their market and ensure the best chances of success for their ideas. Want to know what your audience is thinking? Read this book!”
Jeff Gothelf, author of LeanUX
“When getting ‘out of the building,’ too many people crash and burn right out of the gate and wonder what happened. Talking to Humans is a quick and e ective guide for how Lean Startup interviews should be done: who to talk to, how to talk your way in the door, and how to gain the most insight and learning. Don’t crash and burn – read Talking to Humans!”
Dean Chang, Associate Vice President for Innovation & Entrepreneurship University of Maryland
“A must read for anyone who is considering creating a startup, developing a new product or starting a new division. Read this book  rst – a great guide to the evolving art of customer discovery. Don’t waste your time building products that your customer may or may not want. Before you write the  rst line of code, pitch your idea to investors or build the  rst prototype, do your self a favor, read this book and follow the advice! I guarantee you will make better decisions, build a better product and have a more successful company.”
John Burke, Partner, True Ventures
“Primary market research has been around for a long time because it
has stood the test of time and proved that it is fundamental to building a successful venture; it underlies all that we do at MIT in entrepreneurship.  e question is how we more broadly deployed appropriate skills to
entrepreneurs so they can be guided to do this in an e cient and e ective manner while maintaining rigor. With all the sloganeering out there on the topic, this book stands out in that it delivers real value to the practitioner in this regard.”
Bill Aulet, Managing Director, Martin Trust Center for MIT Entrepreneurship
“Talking to strangers can be scary, but it’s vital to launching any new product.  rough storytelling, Gi  Constable makes customer development concepts accessible.  is book will show you how to articulate assumptions, get useful information and turn it into meaningful insights.  en it delivers practical advice you can use immediately to test your ideas. Fear holds people back.  is book will give you the con dence to jump.”
Andres Glusman, Chief Strategy Of cer, Meetup.com
Table of Contents
14 30
8 11
28
31
32
36
44
52
58
65
67
69
72
74
76
80
82
Foreword Introduction
The Story
Lessons Learned
How To
Getting Started with Customer Discovery Who Do You Want to Learn From?
What Do You Want to Learn?
How Do You Find Your Interview Subjects? How to Ensure an Effective Session?
How Do You Make Sense of What You Learn? Conclusion
Appendix
Cold Approach Examples
Business Assumptions Exercise Teaching Exercise #1: Mock Interviews Teaching Exercise #2: Mock Approach Screwing Up Customer Discovery Glossary
Other Learning Resources
Behind the Book
66
83
8 Talking to Humans
Foreword
“Get out of the building!”  at’s been the key lesson in building startups since I  rst started teaching customer development and the Lean Launchpad curriculum in 2002. Since then, a lot has happened.
 e concepts I  rst outlined in my book  e Four Steps to the Epiphany have grown into an international movement:  e Lean Startup.  e class I developed -  e Lean Launchpad - is now taught at Stanford, UC Berkeley, Columbia University, UCSF, and most recently New York University (NYU). More than 200 college and university faculty have taken my Lean Launchpad Educators Seminar, and have gone on to teach the curriculum at hundreds of universities around the globe.  e National Science Foundation, and now the National Institute of Health, use it to commercialize scienti c research as part of their Innovation Corps (I-Corps) program. My How to Build a Startup class on Udacity has been viewed by over 225,000 students worldwide. During the past few years, we’ve seen dozens of large companies including General Electric, Qualcomm and Intuit begin to adopt the lean startup methodology.
 e Lean Startup turns the decades-old formula of writing
a business plan, pitching it to investors, assembling a team, and launching and selling a product on its head. While terms like “pivot” and “minimum viable product” have become widely used, they
are not understood by many.  e same can be said of “getting out
of the building”. Many entrepreneurs “get out” and get in front of customers, but take a simplistic view and ask their customers what they want, or if they would buy their startup’s (half-baked) product.  e “getting out” part is easy. It is the application of the customer
Foreword & Introduction 9
development methodology and the testing of their hypotheses with users, customers and partners that is both critical and o en di cult for entrepreneurs to grasp in the search for a scalable and repeatable business model.
Since the Four Steps, many other books have been written on customer development including  e Startup Owner’s Manual, Business Model Generation,  e Lean Startup, and others. Each
of these texts has advanced our understanding of the customer development methodology in one way or another, teaching aspiring students and entrepreneurs the what, when and why we should get out of the building, but have only skimmed the surface on “how” to get out of the building.
For both my own classes as well as I-Corps, I always made Gi  Constable’s blog post “12 Tips for Early Customer Development Interviews” required reading. It answered the “how” question as well. Now Gi  has turned those 12 tips into an entire book of great advice.
In a comprehensive, yet concise and accessible manner, Talking to Humans teaches you how to get out of the building. It guides students and entrepreneurs through the critical elements: how to  nd interview candidates, structure and conduct e ective interviews and synthesize your learning. Gi  provides ample anecdotes as well as useful strategies, tactics and best practices to help you hit the ground running in your customer discovery interviews.
If you are a student, aspiring entrepreneur or product manager trying to bring the value of getting out of the building to an existing company, Talking to Humans is a must read. It is chock full of lessons learned and actionable advice that will enable you to make the most of your time out of the building.
Talking to Humans is the perfect complement to the existing
10 Talking to Humans
body of work on customer development. If you are teaching entrepreneurship or running a startup accelerator, you need to make it required reading for your students and teams. I have.
Steve Blank September 3, 2014
Introduction
Foreword & Introduction 11
 
12 Talking to Humans
 e art of being a great entrepreneur is  nding the right balance between vision and reality. You are probably opening this book because you want to put something new in the world.  at’s an incredibly powerful and meaningful endeavor. It’s also scary and extremely risky. How can you get ahead of that risk and beat the odds?
Every new business idea is built upon a stack of assumptions. We agree with Steve Blank’s insight that it is better to challenge your risky assumptions right at the start. You can’t challenge anything sitting in a conference room. You have to get into the market, or, as Blank likes to say, “Get out of the building!”
 ere are two e ective ways to do this: 1. talk directly to your customers and partners, and observe their behavior; 2. run experiments in which you put people through an experience and track what happens.
 is book focuses on the  rst.  e qualitative part of customer discovery is surprisingly hard for most people, partly because talking to strangers can feel intimidating, and partially because our instincts on how to do it are o en wrong.
Here’s what customer discovery is not: It is not asking people to design your product for you. It is not about abdicating your vision. It is also not about pitching. A natural tendency is to try to sell other people on your idea, but your job in customer discovery is to learn.
You are a detective.
You are looking for clues that help con rm or deny your assumptions. Whether you are a tiny startup or an intrapreneurial team within a big company, your goal is not to compile statistically signi cant answers. Instead you want to look for patterns that will help you make better decisions.  ose decisions should lead to action, and smart action is what you need for success.
Foreword & Introduction 13
 is book was written as a focused primer on qualitative research to help you get started. You should view it as a complement to the other excellent resources out there on customer development and lean innovation. It is not a rulebook, but hopefully you will  nd the principles included here useful.
 e book comes in two parts. It begins with a  ctional story of two entrepreneurs doing customer research for the  rst time.  e second part is a mix of theory and tactics to guide you through the core steps of customer discovery. While the  ctional story highlights a consumer-facing business, I should note that there are plenty of tips in this book for teams who sell to the enterprise.
Some last words to kick things o : entrepreneurs have a tendency to over-obsess about their product to the neglect of other business risks.  ey also tend to stay inside their heads for far too long. I urge you to be brave, get out of the building, and go talk to real human beings.
Gi  Constable August 2014
Some Thanks Are Due
Many thanks to Frank Rimalovski for encouraging me to write this, and his students and team at NYU for providing early feedback, Steve Blank for the foreword and his inspiration and leadership on the topic of entrepreneurship, Tom Fishburne for his great illustrations, Josh Seiden and Je  Gothelf for their insights, my colleagues at Neo for continuing to push forward the cra  of customer development, the many speakers and members of New York’s Lean Lessons Learned meetup who have shared their stories with me, and Eric Ries for inspiring me and so many others.
PART ONE
The Story
 
Breakthrough
Koshi and Roberta had so much adrenaline pumping through
their systems that neither could sleep that night. A er a year of challenging lab work, they had  nally cracked it.  ey were now sure they could manufacture arti cial down feathers cost-e ectively.  eir insomnia was ironic, since their very dream was to transform the quality of people’s sleep through the invention of a better pillow.
 ey knew they had a technical advantage.  eir arti cial down had heightened levels of insulation, a better resilience/resistance quotient, and was kinder to both animals and the environment.
Now the question was, did they have a business?
The Advisor
 ey called a meeting with their entrepreneurial advisor the next day. Samantha had built four companies, successfully exiting two of them. She was now an angel investor and believed  rmly in giving back by working with  rst-time entrepreneurs.
“We  nally cracked it!” Roberta blurted out.
“What she means,” Koshi said, “is that we’re convinced we can manufacture NewDown in a cost-e ective and repeatable manner. Now we think we can make a real business.”
“So you want to know if the time has come to jump in feet  rst?” asked Samantha.  e two scientists nodded. “If you want to be successful bringing something to market, you need to understand the market. Do you feel like you know when and why people buy pillows today?”
“Not really,” Roberta said. “We’ve spent our time in the lab focused on the product side.”
“I suspected so. Founders commonly obsess about product at the
The Story 15
16 Talking to Humans
expense of the understanding the customer or the business model. You need to work on it all, and you have to challenge your thinking. Behind your startup is a belief system about how your business will work. Some of your assumptions will be right, but the ones that are wrong could crater your business. I want you to get ahead of the risky hypotheses that might cause failure.”
Samantha had the founders list out the riskiest hypotheses.
1. We believe that people care about sleep quality when making a pillow purchase decision.
2. We believe that we can sell online directly to customers.
3. We believe that our customers will be young urban professionals.
4. We believe that our very  rst customers will be new graduates who need to out t their apartments.
5. We believe that we can sell our pillows at a high enough price to cover our costs.
6. We believe that we can raise enough capital to cover investments in manufacturing.
“Let’s put aside the fundraising risk right now,” Samantha said. “It’s what everyone jumps to, but you need to strengthen your story  rst. Many of your risks are tied to your customer. I like attacking a problem from multiple directions and recommend three approaches. First, I want you to walk a day in your customer’s shoes and actually go out and buy a pillow. Second, I want you to observe people in the process of buying a pillow. And third, I want you to talk directly to them.”
“Talk to people?” said Koshi. “I’m a scientist, not a salesperson. If I simply asked someone if my pillow was better, they would have no idea. If I asked them if they would buy my pillow, I couldn’t trust
the answer. So what is the point?”
“Your job right now isn’t to sell, but rather to learn. You are right, though: getting the customer to speculate is rarely useful,” Samantha said. “You need to understand your market. How does your customer buy? When do they buy? Why do they buy? Where do they buy? As a scientist, you are fully capable of doing research, gathering data, and seeing if your data supports your hypotheses. I promise you, if you are polite and creative, people will be more receptive to you than you might think.”
“Buying. Observing. Talking. Do we really need to do all three? Can we really a ord to spend the time?”
“Can you a ord not to? Each of the three approaches is imperfect, but together you should see patterns. By walking in your customer’s shoes you will gain empathy and personal understanding, but you don’t want to rely solely on your own experience. By watching people shop, you can witness honest behavior, but you won’t be able to get into their heads to know their motivations. By talking to people, you gather intel on both behavior and motivation, but you have to be careful not to take what you hear too literally. Each method has strengths and weaknesses, but taken together you will learn a ton. You will have a lot more con dence that you are either on the right track, or that you have to make changes to your plans. It is far better to discover bad assumptions now, before you have invested a lot! Now, how do you think you should proceed?”
“We want our customers to buy online from us, so I guess we should also buy our own pillow online,” said Roberta. “And we can observe people shopping by going to a home goods store.”
“ at sounds good,” said Samantha. “You will want to talk to some of those people in the store as well. I see one catch: you will be
The Story 17
18 Talking to Humans
targeting the moment of purchase but not the type of customer you are hoping for. One of your risk assumptions was speci cally about young urban professionals and new graduates, so what can you also do to target and connect with them?”
“What about going to a co ee shop near the downtown o ce buildings as people are going to work?” Koshi said.
“Can’t we just hit up some of the people we used to know in college who are now in the working world?” Roberta said.
“Why don’t you try both, and see which approach works better,” said Samantha. “Roberta, I would also ask your friends if they will refer you to their friends. It’s best to talk to people who aren’t too close to you. You don’t want a someone’s a ection for you to steer what they have to say.
“Let’s start by thinking through the questions you want to ask. It always makes sense to prioritize what you want to learn. You should write down an interview plan, even if you don’t completely stick to it. Break the ice, and then get them to tell you a story about buying a pillow!”
 e scientists sketched out a plan:
Intro: hello, I’m a PhD candidate at Hillside University and I’m researching sleep quality. I’m asking people about the last time they bought a pillow. Would you mind if I asked a few questions?
When was the last time you bought a pillow?
Why did you go looking for a pillow?
How did you start shopping for a pillow?
Why did you choose the one you bought?
After you bought, how did you feel about the pillow you purchased?
Are you going to be in the market for a pillow anytime soon?
“ at’s a great start,” Samantha said. “Keep good notes as you go, and remember to regularly regroup to review your  ndings and look for patterns. Be mindful of which method you used as you discuss your observations.”
Walking in the Customer’s Shoes
Koshi and Roberta got together the next day a er both purchasing a pillow online.
“I found it all a bit frustrating,” said Roberta. “It was hard to learn why you would choose down feathers, cotton, or foam.  e manufacturer websites felt like they were from the 1990s.  ere were some reviews available on Amazon and Bed Bath & Beyond, which helped. In my interpretation, about 65% of reviews talked about sleep quality, which seems like a good sign for our  rst risk. A lot of the reviews had to do with personal preference for  rm versus so  pillows. I think we can o er both kinds eventually, but we likely need to choose one at the beginning and that could impact some of our assumptions around market size. ”
“I started out by searching Google,” said Koshi. “Amazon and BB&B dominated the results, as we expected, but there were a few specialty providers like BestPillow that ranked high. BestPillow lets you navigate their website by sleep issue, such as snoring or neck pain, which I found interesting. While I see some makers pushing hypoallergenic o erings, I didn’t see anyone who could meet
our claims of being environmentally friendly. I agree that all the manufacturer websites felt ancient. I think there’s an opportunity to be smart about search engine optimization and really stand out if we can get the messaging right. I guess our next step is to visit the retail
The Story 19
20 Talking to Humans
stores.”
Observing the Customer
Roberta ended up going to a Bed Bath & Beyond while Koshi went to a local department store. She watched three di erent people come in and pick through several di erent pillows, puzzling over the packaging material. One of them asked a store employee for help, and two pulled out their mobile phones to look online. She then watched a woman go right to a particular shelf, grab a pillow and head back to the aisle. Roberta’s plan was to balance observation and interaction, so she decided to jump in. “Pardon me,” she said “I am trying to  gure out which pillow to purchase and noticed that you went right to that one. Might I ask why you chose that pillow?”
“Oh, I replaced some ratty old pillows in my house a few weeks ago,” the woman said, “and I liked this one so much that I thought I would replace my whole set.”
“Do you mind if I ask how you decided to buy that pillow in the  rst place? My name is Roberta, by the way.”
“Nice to meet you, Roberta. I’m Susan. Well, I guess I started by researching online and...”
A day later, the founders met to compare notes.
“ e BB&B had good foot tra c,” Roberta said, “and I was able to watch   een people, and speak to ten. Of the ten, one knew what she wanted going into the store, three were basing their purchase just on packaging and store price, and six did Google searches on their phones, right there in the store.  ey were looking up reviews and pricing. You mentioned search engine optimization earlier — I think it could be even stronger with a fabulous mobile experience.”
She looked down at her notes. “I also found that seven out
of ten were trying to choose a pillow speci cally for better sleep, although their sleep problems were diverse. Finally, when I asked
The Story 21
them why they were buying a pillow, the folks over 40 seemed to be in replacement mode, while the folks under 40 seemed to be reacting to a life change. Two people were moving to a bigger house from
an apartment. Another person was moving in with their girlfriend, and another said that she got a new job and could now a ord nicer things.”
“I went to the home goods section of a high-end department store,” said Koshi. “I saw eighteen people, and  ve of them knew what they wanted already.  e rest spent time puzzling over the packaging and, like your group, going online with their mobile phone. I spoke to nine shoppers. I said that I was a scientist
trying to invent a new pillow. People thought that was pretty cool. Two of them admitted that they were buying the highest price pillow because they assumed that it had to be the best. Two got the cheapest because it was the cheapest.  e others had speci c preferences for down, cotton or foam based on the  rmness they were looking for in a pillow.  e  rmness preference seemed to be tied to a belief that they would sleep more soundly. On price, I was relieved to see that the prices of the better pillows were in line with what we were hoping to charge.”
Roberta pulled out a pad. “So we saw thirty-three people and spoke to nineteen. Our sample set is still small, but Samantha told us to look for patterns and not worry about statistical signi cance right now. If we break our observations into a few metrics, what have we learned?”
• 24% of shoppers knew what they wanted when they walked in
• 52% looked up information on their phone in the store
• 45% of shoppers purchased a mid-priced or high-priced pillow
• 68% of the people we spoke to indicated that better sleep was a major driver of their choice
22
• •
Talking to Humans
37% of the people we spoke to were reacting to a life change 37% of the people we spoke to were in replacement mode
“I think the use of mobile phones is something we need to pay attention to and work into our strategy,” Koshi said. “I guess for our next step, we should follow Samantha’s suggestions to target urban professionals.”
Regrouping
A week and many interviews later, the team sat down with Samantha.
“How did things go?” she asked.
“I went to a downtown co ee shop at peak hour,” Koshi said. “At  rst, everyone was in such a hurry to get to work that I didn’t get much response, but then I made a little sign I held up outside that promised ‘co ee for science,’ which started to get laughs and a lot of curiosity. I ended up talking to about   een people who matched our target of young urban professionals. I got to talk to them for about  ve to twenty minutes each. It was actually very enjoyable.
“One clear pattern was that people right out of school tended
to have no clue.  ey either had never bought a pillow themselves, or if they had, it had been the cheapest thing they could get. A
few admitted that they were probably going to buy new bedding. I know it is speculation, but I asked them to guess how they might go about looking for a pillow, based on how they shop for other things.  e common responses were searching on Google or Amazon, or walking into a Bed Bath & Beyond.
“ e few folks in their later twenties or thirties whom I spoke to had usually bought at least one pillow — some from Amazon and some from retailers.  e ones who liked a  rm pillow avoided
The Story 23
down feathers.  e ones who wanted to upgrade to fancier duvets and high thread-count sheets all seemed to go with duck and goose feathers.  ey didn’t know any brands and instead relied on product packaging. Amazon buyers did actually read the reviews. All these folks were only planning on buying new pillows when they were moving to a bigger apartment because they were getting married or something.”
“Yes, that aligns with what we learned when we spoke to people in the retail stores and what I saw with my other interviews,” said Roberta. “Pillow buying seems to be tied to life events like moving and marriage and such. I interviewed a di erent group. A whole bunch of our old classmates responded to my email or my Facebook post. I even had some folks pass me on to their friends, and so I got to talk to some people who didn’t go to school with us.
“Like you, I saw a lag e ect a er someone graduated from college. When new graduates told me that they had not spent any money on their linens yet, I inquired further and found out that their initial spending money was predominately going towards clothes. I spoke to twelve people between 22 and 25, and roughly 60% had actually bought a pillow in the last few years. I saw similar trends as you, although most went right to Google, Amazon or a few specialty online retailers. It seemed like a very online crowd.  e price sensitive ones stayed away from down.  ey didn’t have much to go on for brand, but the reviews helped.  e women de nitely cared more about quality and put more e ort into their hunt.”
“ e good news is that everyone thought inventing a new pillow was an awesome idea!” said Koshi.
Samantha chuckled. “Of everything I’ve heard you say, that last bit is probably the least useful. It’s easy to say something is cool. It’s another thing to actually buy.  e good news is, you are a lot more educated about your market than you were last time we met.
24 Talking to Humans
I see from your notes that you have either spoken to or observed 72 people. We should be able to see some patterns from that. Let’s revisit our critical assumptions.”
Challenging Assumptions
 e team looked at their initial list.
1. We believe that people care about sleep quality when making a purchase decision.
“68% of the retail shoppers indicated that this was a major factor,” said Roberta. “Of our young urban professionals, we were able to ask this of only a portion of our interviewees. Only 56% indicated that it was a factor, but if we factor out the new graduates, it was more like 70%. We’ve also read a lot of online reviews and have seen this come up repeatedly. We feel reasonably con dent that this is a common decision point in choosing a pillow,” said Koshi.
“I’m glad you are approaching this with rigor and actually calculating metrics from your observations,” said Samantha. “ at will prevent you from letting innate biases override your actual results. However, one word of advice. At this stage, don’t take any of your statistics too literally and don’t let any single number dominate your strategic thinking. Just as we’re not looking for statistical signi cance at this point, we also don’t want to start treating
our results as if they are indisputable facts. How about the next assumption?”
2. We believe that we can sell online directly to customers.
“We have seen some promising signs. 77% of our urban professionals start researching purchases with a search engine.  e question is whether they would discover, visit, or convert with our
The Story 25
online store. We did see a ton of mobile usage in the retail stores and think there might be a chance to steal those customers if we have good enough search engine optimization. Overall, our conclusion is that we need more data here.”
3. We believe that our customers will be young urban professionals.
“I need to run some numbers on size of market and the number of purchases we might expect from this group, but we still feel like this is a good group for us. We clearly saw purchase behavior.  ey want, and can a ord, quality things, and prefer to buy things online.”
4. We believe that our very  rst customers will be new graduates who need to out t their apartments.
“ is is where we were totally wrong. Buying behavior, or at least the willingness to buy something that isn’t the cheapest option, did not seem to be very prevalent among new grads. Only 25% of the newly minted grads we spoke with had purchased a pillow on their own. Instead, the evidence points us towards people in their mid-to- late twenties or early thirties.
“We also saw a correlation between purchasing and life changes. While this was only 37% with our retail shoppers, it was 70% of our urban professionals. From an early adopter perspective, I wonder if we can do well targeting people who are getting married or moving to a larger apartment or house?”
5. We believe we can sell our pillows at a high enough price to cover our costs.
“45% of our retail shoppers bought at least a mid-priced pillow. We admit that we visited reasonably high-end stores, but that was still a nice statistic to see.  e good news is that our initial target price is comparable with the high-end of the current market. We
26 Talking to Humans
won’t be pro table at the beginning, but if we can scale and improve our manufacturing process then we can move into the black. Of course, they have to want to buy our pillow.”
Samantha nodded. “To test that, you will need to actually try selling a few, which ties back to your second risk. But I’m glad
you have spent time learning rather than rushing to sell. Overall,
it sounds like you have gotten some solid intel. I’m also glad you caught the issue with college grads before you spent a lot of money and energy trying to target them. Have your e orts uncovered new risks or worries?”
“I’m both excited and worried by how confused customers are,” Koshi said. “Every brand promises a better night’s sleep. I’m also worried about signals we picked up that the market might be divided into those who want a  rm pillow versus a so  pillow. We think that’s erroneous thinking. Our pillow lands in the middle, and our studies show better results. I don’t know if people will believe our data. We really need to get the messaging right.”
“As for me,” Roberta said, “I’m most worried about the size of our initial market, how quickly we could grow, and if we can survive to pro tability.”
“I’m not surprised,” said Samantha. “I have some suggestions. One of you should continue doing these interviews, but try adding a new spin. You are both worried about di erentiation and if people will understand or appreciate the proof from your scienti c studies. Let’s test some messaging. Given what you have said about mobile usage, maybe create an infographic that tries to make your case. Show it to people on a phone. Ask them to explain it to you. First you can see if they understand it, and then if they  nd it meaningful.
“Expanding from qualitative research, I also think one of you should create a  nancial model that lets you play with how much
The Story 27
you charge, how many items you might sell, and what your costs will be. Take into account what you have learned so far and see if your business model adds up.
“Finally, I think you’ve learned enough to run some experiments around customer acquisition and sales. It is straightforward to create a basic online store using one of the hosted services. You can test selling a few pillows before you invest in manufacturing capability. Try driving tra c through Google or Facebook ads, and run some A/B tests around ad copy, landing-page messaging and price points. Study your metrics.  en follow up with your customers and interview them on their buying process and decision.”
Roberta’s eyes widened. “Wow. Maybe we can get our  rst paying customer!”
“Exactly,” said Samantha. “Just remember Steve Blank’s phrase about startups: you are in search of a scalable and repeatable business model. Run these experiments and keep in mind that your mission at this point is to learn before you scale. Don’t stop talking directly to customers. Your questions will likely evolve, but no matter what stage you are in, you’ll usually  nd that your best insights will come from talking to real people and observing real behavior.”
28 Talking to Humans
Lessons Learned
 
The Story 29
So what are the key takeaways from Roberta and Koshi’s adventure?
1. Customer discovery is about gaining much deeper insight into your customer, or your partners, or your market
2. Being told your idea is cool is not useful; seeing behavior that validates your customer’s willingness to buy is very useful
3. Prepare an interview guide before you get out of the building
4. To ask the right questions, you need to understand your risks and assumptions
5. Get creative when trying to recruit people — if at  rst you don’t succeed, try something new
6. Sometimes observation is as powerful as interviews
7. Take good notes, especially on your key risks, so that you can calculate metrics later. Even better, set your target goals ahead of time!
8. Bring learning back and analyze your patterns as a team
9. Never stop asking hard questions about your business
In the next section of this book, we’re going to dive into tactics and talk about all this and more in detail.
PART TWO
How To
How To 31
Getting Started with Customer Discovery
Qualitative research, i.e. talking to humans, is something you never want to stop doing, but it can de nitely feel intimidating at  rst.  e good news is that if you go about it in a professional and thoughtful way, you will  nd lots of people who are willing to help and give you some of their valuable time.
You need to begin with a core set of questions:
• Who do you want to learn from?
• What do you want to learn?
• How will you get to them?
• How can you ensure an e ective session?
• How do you make sense of what you learn?
32 Talking to Humans
Who Do You Want to Learn From?
 
How To 33
If your desired customer is a doctor, it stands to reason that it won’t help you much talking to a plumber. If you were aiming for teenagers, would you talk to grandparents?
 e  rst step in trying to learn from the market is having an opinion about who your market actually is. I recommend thinking about a few categories:
•  e typical customer you envision if you get traction with your idea
• Your early adopter, i.e. the people who will take a chance on your product before anyone else
• Critical partners for distribution, ful llment, or other parts of your business
You might think you are creating a product for “everyone”, but that is not an actionable or useful description in the early stages. You need to get more speci c. Your job is to think through the kinds of people who have the problem you are interested in solving. Sometimes they have a particular job, or a state of mind, live in a particular
part of the world, or belong to a certain age group. Standard demographics might be useful, or they might be irrelevant. What are the commonalities across your customer base?
Here are some examples:
• A hospital management system has to think about the hospital administrator who will buy their software and the actual hospital workers who would use it
• An on-call veterinarian service needs to talk to pet owners
• An online marketplace for plumbers might consider plumbers on the sell side, and home owners on the buy side
34 Talking to Humans
You also want to think about your early adopters. Why do they matter? Most new products  t alongside a “technology adoption curve,” as illustrated below.
New founders tend to obsess about their mainstream customer (represented in the chart as the early and late majority). However, by de nition, the mainstream is waiting for proof from early adopters before they try something. If you cannot get early adopters, you cannot move on. Early adopters are usually folks who feel a pain point acutely, or love to try new products and services.
In our story of Koshi and Roberta, the scientists hypothesized that their early adopter would be urban professionals in their mid to late twenties. For the three customer examples we just gave, here are examples of early adopters:
• Our hospital management system might target hospital chains still stuck with an archaic vendor
• Our vet service might target busy 20-somethings in a major city
• Our online market for plumbers might target solo practices on the sell- side and  rst-time home owners on the buy-side
 
How To 35
 ere is no prescription for how narrowly or broadly you should cast your net for customer discovery interviews. However, the more focused you can be, the easier it is to make sense of your evidence.
Special Note for B2B Products
If you are selling to the enterprise, you should also think about the di erent kinds of participants in your sales process. In a classic enterprise sale, you will o en have a strategic buyer (who is excited about the change you can bring), an economic buyer (who controls the purse), a technical buyer (who might have approval/blocker rights), and then the actual users of your product. Can you identify your champion? Can you identify who might be a saboteur?
For B2B companies, Steve Blank also recommends that you start by talking to mid-level managers rather than the C-suite. It can be easier to get their time, it is o en easier to get repeat conversations, and, most importantly, it will allow you to get better educated before you go up the chain.
36 Talking to Humans
What Do You Want to Learn?
 
How To 37
Go into every customer interview with a prepared list of questions.  is list, which we refer to as an interview guide, will keep you organized. You will appear more professional, and it will ensure that you get to your most important questions early.
How do you know your most important questions?
I like to begin by understanding my most important, and most
risky, assumptions.  ose tend to be the areas where you need to gather insights most urgently. You can uncover your assumptions
in a myriad of ways. You can use Alex Osterwalder’s business model canvas or Ash Maurya’s lean canvas. Personally, I ask these questions (see the Appendix for a worksheet and tips):
• My target customer will be?
• The problem my customer wants to solve is?
• My customer’s need can be solved with?
• Why can’t my customer solve this today?
• The measurable outcome my customer wants to achieve is?
• My primary customer acquisition tactic will be?
• My earliest adopter will be?
• I will make money (revenue) by?
• My primary competition will be?
• I will beat my competitors primarily because of?
• My biggest risk to  nancial viability is?
• My biggest technical or engineering risk is?
• What assumptions do we have that, if proven wrong, would cause this business to fail? (Tip: include market size in this list)
You should be able to look at this list and spot the assumptions that are both highly important and fairly uncertain. Be honest. You want to focus on the most important issues.
38 Talking to Humans
In the case of our pillow entrepreneurs, they chose six initial risks which drove their research approach and  rst set of questions. To give another scenario, in the last chapter we shared the example of an on-call veterinarian service.  e founders might identify a set of risks:
1. Pet owners are frustrated having to go to a vet and would rather have someone come to them
2. Customers are willing to pay a big premium to have a vet show up at their door
3. We think busy urbanite pet owners will be our early adopters
4. We think people currently discover their vets either through word of mouth or online searches
5. We can affordably acquire our customers through targeted Google search ads
6. We can recruit enough vets across the country to make this a big enough business
7. With travel baked in, our vets can see enough people in a day to be  nancially viable
Not every assumption can be tested e ectively through qualitative research, but in this case, our founders can probably get some insights on risks 1, 3, 4, and 6 just by talking to people. Risks 1, 3 and 4 would be focused on pet owners, while #6 would be focused on vets.
Get Stories, Not Speculation
When you are contemplating your questions, be careful with speculation. Humans are spectacularly bad at predicting their future behavior. It is tempting to say, “Would you like this idea?” or “Would you buy this product?” Unfortunately, you really have to treat those
How To 39
answers with a great deal of skepticism.
It is more e ective to ask your interview subject to share a story
about the past. For example, when our  ctional scientists Koshi and Roberta created their interview plan, the questions were focused on getting the interviewee to tell a story about their last pillow buying experience.
Keeping with our second example of an on-call vet service, the team might have a loose interview plan that looks like the following:
• Warm up: concise intro on the purpose of the conversation
• Warm up: basic questions about person and pet (name, age, picture)
• Who is your current vet? Can you tell me about how you found and chose him/her?
• Please describe the last time you had to take your pet to the vet for a checkup
• Walk me through the process of scheduling a time to visit the vet.
• What was frustrating about that experience?
• What did you like about that experience?
• Have you ever had an emergency visit to a vet? if yes, can you describe that experience for me?
• Have you ever thought about changing vets? why / why not?
Ask Open-Ended Questions
Your goal is to talk little and get the other person sharing openly. To that end, it is imperative that you structure open-ended questions, or at minimum follow up yes/no questions with an open-ended question that gets them talking.
One tip is to try to ask questions that start with words like
who, what, why and how. Avoid questions that start with is, are, would, and do you. But remember, if you do get a yes/no answer to a
40 Talking to Humans
question, you can always follow up in a way that gets them talking. An interesting open-ended question, which Steve Blank likes to
use to conclude his interviews, is: “What should I have asked you that I didn’t?”
Testing for Price
Two of the hardest questions to answer through qualitative research are: will people pay? and how much will they pay? Speculative answers on this topic are extremely suspect. You can learn a lot, however, by asking questions like:
• How much do you currently spend to address this problem?
• What budget do you have allocated to this, and who controls it?
• How much would you pay to make this problem go away? (this can lead to interesting answers as long as you don’t take answers too literally)
My recommendation is to set up a situation where the subject thinks they are actually buying something, even if they know
the thing doesn’t exist yet. Kickstarter and other crowdfunding platforms are used by a lot of teams to test pre-order demand.
For expensive corporate products, you can also try to get customers to buy in advance or sign a non-binding letter of intent to buy.  e key thing to remember is that people don’t honestly think about willingness to pay unless they feel like it is a real transaction.
Getting Feedback on a Prototype
Sometimes you will want to get reactions to a product solution. You can learn a lot by putting mockups or prototypes in front of people, but, as with all speculation, you should interpret reactions with a degree of skepticism.
If you show your interview subject a proposed solution, you need to separate this step from your questions about their behavior.
How To 41
Ask your questions about behavior and challenges  rst, so that the discussion about product features does not poison or take over the conversation. People do love talking features!
The Magic Wand Question
Some people like to ask, “if you could wave a magic wand and have this product do whatever you want, what would it do?” Personally, I avoid questions like this because customers are too constrained by their current reality to design e ective solutions. It is the customer’s job to explain their behavior, goals, and challenges. It is the product designer’s job to come up with the best solution.
 ere is one variation to the magic wand question that I do like, however, because it focuses on problems and not solutions: “If you could wave a magic wand and solve any problem, what would you want to solve?” I suspect, however, that you will  nd many people struggle with such an open question.
Design “Pass/Fail” Tests
Customer discovery is made up of a lot of qualitative research, but it helps to take a quantitative mindset. Set goals for key questions and track results. For example, halfway through their initial research, our scientists Koshi and Roberta already knew stats like:
• 24% of shoppers knew what they wanted when they walked in
• 45% of shoppers purchased a mid-priced or high-priced pillow
• 68% of the shoppers we spoke to indicated that better sleep was a major driver of their choice
Even better would have been if they had set targets ahead of time. For example, they might have set the following goals:
• Because we are a new brand, we are hoping that most shoppers are undecided. We want to see that 40% or fewer shoppers already know what
42
Talking to Humans
they want when they walk in
Because our pillow is expensive, we want to see that at least 40% of the shoppers buy mid or high-end models
Because we believe that sleep quality is a major differentiator for our product, we want over 60% of shoppers to indicate that this is a major factor in their decision making process
• •
 e numerical target you choose can be an educated guess. You do not need to stress over picking the perfect number. It is more important that you set a goal and really track what is happening. Setting a target forces you carefully think through what you are hoping to see, and makes decisions and judgment calls a bit easier as you review your data.
A Guide, Not a Script
An interview guide is not a script. You do not need to read from
it like an automaton. You should feel free to veer o  of it if the conversation brings up something interesting and new. It will likely evolve as you learn from the market and unearth new questions. But always plan, prioritize and prep your questions before any session.
Observation Can Be As Powerful As Questions
Sometimes the best thing you can do is sit back and watch someone’s behavior. You might watch their purchase process, or examine how they go about solving a particular problem. As you think about what you want to learn, also think through how you might gather data through observation rather than direct interviews.
In our story of Koshi and Roberta, the two got some of their most valuable insights by going to linen stores and watching potential customers struggle to buy a pillow.  ey observed behavior and only then jumped in to ask questions.
 is technique cannot always be used. For example, when my
How To 43
team was trying to validate a weight loss product idea, it did not feel practical to watch people go about their diet. Instead we did interviews and then put a group of customers through a two-week concierge experiment (see Glossary) where we manually acted out the diet experience. But, where possible, observing unin uenced behavior can lead to great insights.
44 Talking to Humans
How Do You Find Your Interview Subjects?
 
How To 45
Entrepreneurs new to customer development are o en intimidated at the thought of approaching complete strangers. It might surprise you to hear that people are o en very willing to help out.  is is especially true if you are working on a topic that interests them
and you approach them nicely and professionally.  ere are three general rules to keep in mind when recruiting candidates to speak with:
1. Try to get one degree of separation away (don’t interview your mom, your uncle, or your best friends)
2. Be creative (and don’t expect people to come to you)
3. Fish where the  sh are (and not where they are not)
Get Creative
One aspiring entrepreneur wanted to target mothers of young children. She had heard stories about talking to people in a co ee shop, but felt like it was too unfocused. So she tried hanging around school pickup zones, but the moms were too busy and refused to speak to her. Next, she tried the playground, where she  gured moms would be bored watching their kids play.  is worked reasonably well, but she was only able to get a few minutes of anyone’s time. So instead, she started organizing evening events for moms at a local spa where she bought them pedicures and wine.  e time of day worked because the moms could leave the kids at home with their partner.  e attendees had a great time and were happy to talk while they were getting their nails done.
Find the Moment of Pain
If you can connect with people at the moment of their theoretical pain, it can be very illuminating. My colleague Alexa Roman was working with an automotive company and they had a concept tied
46 Talking to Humans
to the experience of getting gas. So Alexa and team visited a series of gas stations.  ey watched consumers go through the process of buying gas.  en they approached them and asked questions. By thinking about the moment of pain they wanted to address, they knew exactly where to  nd their consumers and they were able to gather valuable observational research.
Make Referrals Happen
Use referrals to your advantage. Let’s say you want to talk to doctors.  ey are busy and have strong gatekeepers. I bet you know how
to get to at least one doctor, however.  at doctor will know other doctors. Even if your doctor happens to be a close friend and thus breaks the “more than one degree of separation” guideline, she
can still give you advice on when might be a good time to talk to a doctor. She can also connect you with other doctors.
You should use referrals as much as possible. Set a goal of walking out of every interview with 2 or 3 new candidates. When you end an interview, ask the person if they know others who
face the problem you are trying to solve. If they feel like you have respected their time, they will o en be willing to introduce you to others.
Conferences & Meetups
Conferences and meetups can be an amazing recruiting ground, because they bring a group of people with shared interests into one place. You just need to be respectful of people’s time. I have found that it is extremely e ective to ask people for their time, but for later, a er the conference or meetup. Get their business card, let them
get back to networking, and then have an in-depth conversation when it  ts their schedule. Immediately a er the conference while their memories are still fresh, send them a short email that reminds them where you met, and give your ask for a conversation.  is
How To 47
works as e ectively for in-demand panel speakers as it does for other attendees.
Meetups are usually inexpensive, but conference tickets can be pricey. If you are on a budget, you can “hack” expensive conferences by intercepting people outside of the building, or, if you can get access to the attendee or speaker lists ahead of time, contacting people directly and meeting them near the event.
Meetup.com has decent search tools to discover relevant events in your area, and a few good Google search queries can usually get you to a short list of conferences that  t your needs.
Enterprise Customers
Finding interviewees can be harder when you are focused on an enterprise customer. You need laser-like targeting. In addition
to conferences, LinkedIn can be extremely useful. If you have hypotheses on the titles of the people you are seeking, run searches on LinkedIn. You might be able to get to them through a referral over LinkedIn, or you might need to cold call them through their company’s main phone number. You then have to decide on your approach method. You can either ask for advice (where you make it clear that you are not selling anything), or you can go in as if you were selling something speci c.
Advice vs Selling
Asking for advice should be your default method early in your customer discovery process. You will have better luck gaining access. People like being asked (it makes them feel important). Steve Blank used to call people up and say something like, “My name is Steve and [dropped name] told me you were one of the smartest people in the industry and you had really valuable advice to o er. I’m not trying to sell you anything, but was hoping to get 20 minutes of your time.”
48 Talking to Humans
Another e ective spin on “asking for advice” is to create a blog focused on your problem space, and ask people if you can interview them for an article.
When do you approach someone as if you were selling a product?  is method is useful if you are past initial learning and want to test your assumptions around customer acquisition and messaging. Just don’t jump into sales mode too early.
Bene tting from Gatekeepers
If LinkedIn isn’t helping you and you need to reach high up in an organization, another approach is to call the CEO’s o ce. Your goal is not to talk to the CEO but actually their executive assistant. His job is to be an e ective gatekeeper, so if you explain, “I’m looking to talk to the person who handles X”, they will o en connect you to the right person (especially if you are pleasant and professional — notice the trend on that one?).  e added advantage of this method is if you end up leaving a voice mail for your intended contact, you can say “Jim from [CEO’s name]’s o ce gave me your name”. Dropping the boss’ name tends to improve response rates.
Another approach is to send a targeted email into an organization with a very short email that asks for an introduction to the right person to speak to. You can make guesses as to email addresses based on LinkedIn queries. For this tactic to work, you must keep your emails extremely concise.
Students and Researchers
While people are willing to grant time to polite people who ask for advice, you have an extra advantage if you are a student or academic researcher. In other words, if you are a student or researcher, say
so. As an extra incentive, you might also o er to share the results of your research with your interview subjects.
You Might Be Surprised
Another colleague of mine, Jonathan Irwin, was working with a Fortune 50 company.  e client team wanted to interview a special kind of oil platform engineer, of which there were less than 20 in the world! To access these people required security clearance and safety training. We challenged the team to  nd a way, expecting that they would have to rely on video conferencing or phone calls. However, the team started researching this speciality profession through Google and discovered that there was an onshore training facility just an hour away.  e moral of the story is that it o en isn’t as hard as you think.
No Fish in the Sea
When I say  sh where the  sh are, it is really important to remember the  ip side to that statement: don’t  sh where the  sh are not. If a method isn’t working, try something new.
We were doing a project with a major magazine testing out new product ideas. Our target was busy women, and we knew that the readership correlated closely with shoppers of  e Container Store (a retail store). So we parked out front of a store and intercepted folks as they came in and out. People were willing to speak for a few minutes, but many were in a bit too much of a rush.  en one of our teammates discovered a sample sale happening around the corner.  ere were probably 200 bored women waiting in line, most of whom were happy to talk to us to pass the time. (Note:  nding bored people stuck in line is a common recruiting hack.)
Still, we didn’t feel like we were targeting quite as narrowly as we wanted (busy, working women) or as geographically broadly (we didn’t want to just talk to New Yorkers). So we turned to the magazine’s social media presence. We created a short online survey to help us qualify responses, and the magazine posted a link to their Twitter and Facebook pages with a catchy sentence. We had hundreds of women  ll out the survey, and then we picked our top
How To 49
50 Talking to Humans
thirty candidates and scheduled calls.
Online Forms & Landing Pages
In a similar vein, one e ective tactic is to create an online form or landing page and build up a list of people to contact.
Below is an example of a landing page. Our team was testing a product idea for better home organization.
 is landing page test actually consisted of a three-step funnel with a call to action, a price choice, and then a request for an email address. We tracked the conversion metrics carefully and used the emails to schedule interviews.
Caveat: driving tra c is never a trivial process. If you have budget, Google or Facebook ads can work. Otherwise, you can try to generate some word of mouth on social media or through bloggers.
 
Conclusion
Hopefully what you are picking up through these examples is that there is no single way to get to people. It takes some creativity and hustle, but it isn’t as hard as you might think. Trust me, people will not think you are rude if you carry yourself well and act professionally.
Check Out the Appendix for Examples
 e Appendix has more tips and examples for cold email and voice mail approaches.
How To 51
52 Talking to Humans
How to Ensure an Effective Session?
 
How To 53
I recommend the following guidelines for running a productive interview session.
Do Your Interviews In Person
 e quality of your learning can vary a lot depending on your communication method. Talking in person is by far the best approach. You can read body language and build rapport much easier. Remember that a huge percentage of human communication is non-verbal, so why blind your senses if you don’t have to?
 e next best approach is video conferencing, because at least you can still read someone’s facial expressions.
Phone calls should be your method of last resort (sometimes there is no choice), and I would entirely avoid using text-based mediums like email or chat.
Talk to One Person at a Time
I believe in talking to one person at a time. It is useful to have
a second person on your side quietly taking notes. I strongly recommend avoiding focus groups for two reasons: 1. you want
to avoid group think; 2. you will really struggle to focus on one person’s stories, and drill into areas of interest, when you are juggling multiple people.
Adding a Note Taker
Bringing a note taker will allow you to stay in the moment without worrying about getting every bit down on paper. You can stay focused on the topics, the body language, and where to take the conversation.
If you have to take your own notes, that’s not the end of the world. It can sometimes make for a more intimate conversation. Just remember to write up your notes right a er the session or you will lose a lot of detail and color that you weren’t able to write down.
You can also ask the interview subject if you can record them,
54 Talking to Humans
and many people are willing.  e risk is that a recorder can inhibit the conversation, but most people forget that they are being recorded once the discussion is  owing. I highly recommend that you play back the audio and write up your notes soon a er the session, both because writing up notes will reinforce what you learned in your own mind, and also because written notes are easier and faster for both you and your teammates to scan. I’ve found that once audio
or video is more than a couple weeks old, somehow they never get touched again.
Start With a Warm Up & Keep It Human
When you kick things o , concisely explain why you are there, and thank them for the time. Launch into things with one or two easy warm up questions. For example, if you are talking to a consumer, you might ask where they are from and what they do for a living. If you are talking to enterprise, you might ask how long they have been with their company. You don’t want to spend a lot of time on this stu , but it does get the ball rolling.
Have a written or printed list of questions, but don’t rigidly read from your list. Be in the moment. Make the interview subject feel like you are really listening to them.
Disarm Your Own Biases
Human beings have an amazing ability to hear what they want
to hear (this is called “con rmation bias”). Go into each session prepared to hear things that you might not want to hear. Some entrepreneurs even take the mindset that they are trying to kill their idea, rather than support it, just to set the bar high and prevent themselves from leading the witness.
Get Them to Tell a Story
As I mentioned in the chapter “What Do You Want to Learn,”
How To 55
humans are terrible at predicting their own behavior. If you ask any speculative questions, be prepared to listen with a healthy dose of skepticism. I far prefer to get people telling stories about how they experienced a problem area in the past. In particular, try to  nd
out if they have tried to solve the problem. What triggered their search for a solution? How did they look for a solution? What did they think the solution would do, before they tried it? How did
that particular solution work out? And if they are struggling to remember speci cs, help them set the scene of their story: what part of the year or time of day? Were you with anyone?
As they are telling their story, follow up with questions about their emotional state. You might get some historical revisionism, but what you hear can be very illuminating.
 e researchers at Meetup.com, who borrow from Clayton Christensen’s Jobs To Be Done framework, use an interesting tactic to help their subjects get in story mode. When they are asking someone to take them through a purchase experience, from  rst thought through purchase and then actual product usage, they say: “Imagine you are  lming the documentary of your life. Pretend you are  lming the scene, watching the actor playing you. At this moment, what is their emotion, what are they feeling?”
Look for Solution Hacks
One of the best indicators that the market needs a new or better solution is that some people are not just accepting their frustration with a particular problem, but they are actively trying to solve it. Maybe they have tried a few di erent solutions. Maybe they have tried hacking together their own solution.  ese stories are a great indicator of market need.
Understanding Priority
For someone to try a new product, their pain usually needs to be
56 Talking to Humans
acute enough that they will change their behavior, take a risk, and even pay for it. If you feel like you are seeing good evidence that someone actually has a problem, it is worth asking where it ranks in their list of things to solve. Is it their #1 pain, or something too low in priority to warrant attention and budget?
Listen, Don’t Talk
Try to shut up as much as possible. Try to keep your questions short and unbiased (i.e. don’t embed the answer you want to hear into the question).
Don’t rush to  ll the “space” when the customer pauses, because they might be thinking or have more to say. Make sure you are learning, not selling! Or, at least make sure you are not in “sales” mode until the point when you actually do try to close a sale as part of an experiment.
Follow Your Nose and Drill Down
Anytime something tweaks your antenna, drill down with follow up questions. Don’t be afraid to ask for clari cations and the “why” behind the “what.” You can even try drilling into multiple layers of “why” (run an Internet search for “Five Whys” for more info), as long as the interviewee doesn’t start getting annoyed.
Parrot Back or Misrepresent to Con rm
For important topics, try repeating back what the person said. You can occasionally get one of two interesting results.  ey might correct you because you’ve misinterpreted what they said. Or, by hearing their own thoughts, they’ll actually realize that their true opinion is slightly di erent, and they will give you a second, more sophisticated answer.
Another approach is to purposefully misrepresent what they just said when you parrot it back, and then see if they correct you. But
use this technique sparingly, if at all.
Do a Dry Run
If you are a beginner at customer discovery, do a dry run with a friend or colleague. See how your questions feel coming out of your mouth. Get a sense of what it is like to listen carefully and occasionally improvise.
Getting Feedback on Your Product
If you want to get feedback on your product ideas, whether you show simple mockups or a more polished demo, there are a few important tips to keep in mind:
As I mentioned before, separate the storytelling part of your session from the feedback part. People love to brainstorm on features and solutions, and this will end up in uencing the stories they might tell. So dig into their stories  rst, and gather any feedback second.
Second, disarm their politeness training. People are trained not to call your baby ugly. You need to make them feel safe to do this. Ask them up-front to be brutally honest, and explain that it is the very best way for them to help you. If they seem confused, explain that the worst thing that could happen is to build something people didn’t care about.
Finally, keep in mind that it is incredibly easy for people to tell you that they like your product. Don’t trust this feedback. Instead, you need to put people through an actual experience and watch their behavior or try to get them to open their wallet.
 ere is no right answer on how polished your early mockups need to be. If you are in the fashion space, you need to have a high degree of visual polish as table stakes. If you are creating a solution for engineers, you probably need much less. Just don’t wait for perfection, because initial product versions rarely get everything right. You need to spot your errors sooner rather than later.
How To 57
58 Talking to Humans
How Do You Make Sense of What You Learn?
 
How To 59
Your goal is not to learn for learning’s sake. Your goal is to make better decisions that increase the odds of success. So how do you translate your observations into decisions?
 e  rst step is to make sense of your patterns.
Take Good Notes
To  nd your patterns,  rst you need to track the data.  is is easy if you bring a good notetaker to the interview, but otherwise, make sure that you write up your notes as soon a er your conversation as possible. Make them available to the entire team with Google Docs or the equivalent.
At the start of every entry, note the following information:
• Name of interview subject
• Date and time
• Name of interviewer
• In person or video conference
• Photo (if you have one)
 en at the start of your notes, include basic descriptive information of the interview subject.
Quantitative Measures
If you are setting speci c metric goals for your interviews, you might set up a shared spreadsheet that essentially acts as a running scorecard for how you are doing and how you are tracking to targets.
EXAMPLE
Let’s imagine that you have invented a new air puri er that triples the growth speed of greenhouse plants. Now you plan to talk to 20
60 Talking to Humans
farmers, and you have a few core questions:
• Will their business actually bene t from increased growth speed? You are assuming that increased volume will help rather than hurt. You plan to talk to growers of different crops with the goal of  nding crops where 60% or more of farmers want increased volume.
• Are farmers spending any money today on growth accelerator solutions? Your qualitative research will drill into what and why, but your metrics goal says that you hope at least 50% of the market is already spending at least some money.
• Do they have the facilities to support your puri er? In this case, you need your puri er to be both in a speci c location, but also have access to an electrical outlet. You are hoping that 70% of the farmers have an outlet 20 feet or closer to your spot.
Here is the kind of spreadsheet that you and your team might track:
As Samantha advised Koshi and Roberta in the  ctional story, turning your observations into quanti able metrics is both
useful and tricky. Our brains like to in uence our thinking with cognitive biases, especially  ltering results for what we want to hear. Calculating actual metrics helps  ght against that dynamic.
 
How To 61
At the same time, you have to beware a di erent kind of bias: our desire to turn statistics into facts. Hopefully you are getting enough data points that you can trust the patterns, but do not confuse this with statistical signi cance or take your results too literally. My advice is to calculate metrics, but remain skeptical of them, don’t obsess over any one particular metric, and continue to question what is behind your numbers.
Dump and Sort Exercise
Bring your team together and arm them with sticky notes and sharpies. Give everyone 10 minutes to jot down as many patterns and observations as they saw during their interviews. Put all the sticky notes on a wall and have someone sort them into groups. As a team, discuss the patterns, and then re-review your assumptions or business canvas and see what might need to change or require greater investigation.
Look for Patterns and Apply Judgement
Customer development interviews will not give you statistically signi cant data, but they will give you insights based on patterns.  ey can be very tricky to interpret, because what people say is
not always what they do. You don’t want to react too strongly to
any single person’s comments. You don’t want to take things too literally. But neither do you want to be bogged down trying to talk to thousands of people before you can make a decision.
You need to use your judgement to read between the lines,
to read body language, to try to understand context and agendas, and to  lter out biases based on the types of people in your pool of interviewees. But it is exactly the ability to use human judgement based on human connections that make interviews so much more useful than surveys.
Ultimately, you are better o  moving fast and making decisions
62 Talking to Humans
from credible patterns than dithering about in analysis paralysis.
Don’t Abdicate Your Role As Product Designer
It is not the job of the customer to design your product. It is yours. As you are gathering information and making decisions, act like a intelligent  lter, not an order-taker.
Expect False Positives
While all entrepreneurs get their fair share of naysayers and
skeptics, you have to be wary of the opposite problem in customer development interviews. People will want to be helpful and nice, and your brain will want to hear nice things. As you are weighing what you have learned, just keep this in mind.
The Truth Curve
I am a big believer in qualitative research. I think a good product team should build a regular cadence of talking to relevant people into their process. However, you don’t want your only source of learning to be talking to people.
You don’t really know the absolute truth about your product until it is live and people are truly using it and you are making real money from it. But that does not mean you should jump straight to a live product, because that is a very expensive and slow way to iterate your new business.
Get into the market early and begin testing your assumptions right away, starting with conversations and proceeding from there. It will dramatically increase the odds that you will create a product that customers actually want. As you build con dence, test with increasing levels of  delity. I think of it like peeling an onion in reverse.
I created the accompanying chart to demonstrate the levels of believability for di erent kinds of experiments.
How To 63
 Talking to people is powerful. It tends to give you your biggest leaps of insight, but, as I keep on repeating, what people say is not what they do. You might show people mockups and that might
give you another level of learning and feedback, but reactions still need to be taken with skepticism. Concierge and “Wizard of Oz” experiments, where you fake the product through manual labor (see Glossary) will give you stronger evidence, because you put people through an experience and watch their actions.  e next layers of the onion are to test with a truly functional “Minimum Viable Product” (see Glossary) and beyond.
 e point I want to make is that all of the steps on the curve can be very useful to help you learn, make smarter decisions, and reduce risk, but you need to use your head, and apply judgement to everything you are learning.
64 Talking to Humans
How many people to talk to?
 ere is no pat answer to this question. A consumer business should talk to an order of magnitude more people than a business that sells to enterprise. If you are in the consumer space and haven’t spoken
to at least 50 to 100 people, you probably have not done enough research. In his I-Corps course, Steve Blank requires his teams, many of which are B2B, to talk to at least 100 people over 7 weeks.
I advise that you never stop talking to potential customers,
but you will probably evolve what you seek to learn. If you see the same patterns over and over again, you might change things up and examine di erent assumptions and risks. For example, if you feel like you have a  rm understanding of your customer’s true need, you might move on to exploring how they learn about and purchase solutions in your product category today.
And don’t forget that observing your customers can be as powerful as directly talking to them.
Lead with Vision
Customer Development and lean startup techniques are some of the most powerful ways to increase your odds of success, but they are not a replacement for vision. You need to start with vision. You need to start with how you want to improve the world and add value to people’s lives.  e techniques we’ve discussed in this book are among a body of techniques that let you reality check your vision, and optimize the path you will take to achieve your vision.
Conclusion
 oughtful qualitative research is a critical tool for any entrepreneur. Hopefully this book has given you some new strategies for how to put it to work for your needs.
Creating a new business is tremendously challenging.  e ways you can fail are numerous.
• You have to get the customer and market right
• You have to get the revenue model right
• You have to get the cost structure right
• You have to get customer acquisition right
• You have to get the product right
• You have to get the team right
• You have to get your timing right
Screw up any one of those and you are toast.  ere is a reason why entrepreneurship is not for the faint of heart.
But we’re not here to be faint of heart. We are here to change the world.
Dream big. Be passionate. Just be ruthless with your ideas and assumptions. Customer discovery and lean experimentation can truly help you chart a better path and  nd success faster and with more capital e ciency.
Don’t forget that as your business grows and changes, so too will your customer base. Keep on reality-checking your hypotheses. Keep on talking to humans.
How To 65
PART THREE
Appendix
Appendix 67
Cold Approach Examples
When you are trying to reach someone you do not know, there are a few things to remember:
1. Keep things concise
2. Keep things convenient (meet near their o ce, etc)
3. Name drop when you can
4. Follow up if you don’t hear an answer, but don’t be annoying
5. If you are leaving a voice mail, practice it  rst (you might think it sounds practiced, but to others, it will sound more professional)
Example Email 1
To: john.smith@may ower.com From: me@me.com
John,
I received your name from James Smith. He said that you had a lot of expertise in an area I am researching and recommended that we speak.
I’m trying to study how companies are handling their expense report management work ows and the frustrations they are experiencing. I would be happy to share my research conclusions with you.
Would you have 30 minutes to spare next week when I could buy you a cup of coffee and ask you a few questions?
Many thanks for your time and I look forward to hearing from you, Jane Doe
68 Talking to Humans
Example Email 2
To: john.smith@may ower.com From: me@me.com
John,
I have been working on some new solutions in the area of expense report management, and I was told that you have a lot of expertise in this area.
We started this journey because of personal frustration, and we’re trying to  gure out how to make expense reporting much less painful. Would you have 30 minutes to give us some advice, and share some of your experiences in this domain?
I assure you that I’m not selling anything. I would be happy to come by your of ce or arrange a quick video conference, at your preference.
Many thanks, Jane Doe
Example Voice Mail Message
“Hello, my name is Jane Doe. I was referred to you by James Smith, who said I would bene t from your advice. I am currently researching how companies are handling their expense management work ows. I understand you have a lot of expertise in this area. I was hoping to take just 30 minutes of your time to ask you a few questions. I’m not selling anything and I would be happy to share my research conclusions with you. You can reach me at 555-555-5555. Again, this is Jane Doe, at 555-555-5555, and thank you for your time.”
Final Note
Cold calling is never anyone’s favorite thing to do, but it isn’t nearly as painful as you imagine. You have nothing to lose and everything to gain. So give yourself a determined smile in the mirror, and go get them!
Appendix 69
Business Assumptions Exercise
I am agnostic about the framework you choose to use to map out your business assumptions. Alexander Osterwalder’s business model canvas and Ash Maurya’s lean canvas are both powerful tools. I also o en  nd myself using this simple set of questions to lay out a belief system around an idea:
Try to make your assumptions as concise and speci c as possible. You want to be able to run an experiment against it to see if it is true.
My target customer will be?
(Tip: how would you describe your primary target customer)
The problem my customer wants to solve is?
(Tip: what does your customer struggle with or what need do they want to ful ll)
My customer’s need can be solved with?
(Tip: give a very concise description / elevator pitch of your product)
Why can’t my customer solve this today?
(Tip: what are the obstacles that have prevented my customer from solving this already)
The measurable outcome my customer wants to achieve is?
(Tip: what measurable change in your your customer’s life makes them love your product)
70 Talking to Humans
My primary customer acquisition tactic will be?
(Tip: you will likely have multiple marketing channels, but there is often one method, at most two, that dominates your customer acquisition — what is your current guess)
My earliest adopter will be?
(Tip: remember that you can’t get to the mainstream customer without getting early adopters  rst)
I will make money (revenue) by?
(Tip: don’t list all the ideas for making money, but pick your primary one)
My primary competition will be?
(Tip: think about both direct and indirect competition)
I will beat my competitors primarily because of?
(Tip: what truly differentiates you from the competition?)
My biggest risk to  nancial viability is?
(Tip: what could prevent you from getting to breakeven? is there something baked into your revenue or cost model that you can de-risk?)
My biggest technical or engineering risk is?
(Tip: is there a major technical challenge that might hinder building your product?)
And then answer the following open-ended question. Be creative and really examine your points of failure.
Appendix 71
What assumptions do we have that, if proven wrong, would cause this business to fail?
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12.
A er you have looked at your business holistically and also answered the broad  nal question, mark the assumptions that would have a large impact on your business and feel highly uncertain.
Now you know your priorities for customer discovery and the experiments you need to run!
72 Talking to Humans
Teaching Exercise #1: Mock Interviews
If you are using this book to try to teach customer discovery/ development, there is nothing like real-world practice to make learning stick.
Before you send your class out into the world to conduct their own interviews, however, you might try a compact exercise like the following:
Tools
All participants should have pen and paper
Preface: Choose a Topic
Everyone in the class will interview each other based on the same topic, which means it needs to be something most people can relate two.  ere are two angles you might take:
1. Something that helps the interviewer dig up past behavior.
For example, “Tell me about the last thing you purchased over $100.” Have the interview subject explain what they bought, what the purchase process was like from desire to actual ownership, how they made their purchase decision, etc.
2. Something that helps the interviewer unlock deeper motivations and desires. For example, “Tell me about your dream car.” Prompt your students not just to get people to describe the car, but to dig into the reasons behind the choice; they can also prompt for whether the interview subject has ever experienced driving the car.
Exercise
Step 1: Intro, 5 minutes
Explain the exercise, the topic that the students will use, and give
a few speci c suggestions for questions they might ask. Example questions for the dream car: when did you fall in love with the car and why? of the reasons you shared, why are these the most important to you? how have you imagined using the car? etc
Step 2: Interview Plan, 2 minutes
Give your class the topic and let them spend 5 minutes on their own.  ey should write down no more than 6 questions to ask.
Step 3: Pair Interviews, 5 - 7 minutes each
Pair up your students. One will begin as the interviewer, and their opposite will be interviewed. Give them 7 minutes, and then switch the roles, keeping the pairs unchanged.  e new interviewer gets 7 minutes.
 e person doing the interviewing should also take notes, which will give them some exposure to doing an interview solo as opposed to bringing a note-taker to help (which is what most people prefer to do when possible).
Step 4: Observations and Questions, 5-10 minutes
Ask the room to share observations, challenges, lessons or questions on what it was like to do a live interview.
Appendix 73
74 Talking to Humans
Teaching Exercise #2: Mock Approach
Dean Chang, the Associate VP of Entrepreneurship at the University of Maryland, recommends a class exercise where one or more teams of students takes on the role of cold calling an “expert.”  e team has to do it over and over until they get it right.
For this exercise, select one team and have them come to the front of the classroom.  eir job is to “cold call” a selected member of the teaching team.  e teacher will pretend to be an expert in the team’s target  eld.  e team needs to get the expert to take the call, and smoothly transition into asking questions.
 e job of the person playing the “expert” is to block the team’s misguided attempts to engage. When the team does something wrong, the expert declines the interview request, or ends the conversation, or gives them a gong.  en the team has to start over again.
Classic mistakes that should trigger the team starting over include long or unclear introductions, pitching the product/technology too soon, implying that the expert has problems and desperately needs help, and/or generally making the expert feel uncomfortable with the line of questioning.
As Dean describes it, “We let the other teams o er critiques and suggest plans of attack for winning over the expert and then the chosen team tries it again. Eventually a er being gonged several times in a row, they stop making the same mistakes and start to
Appendix 75
converge on a good elevator pitch that praises and disarms the expert and paves the way to entering into an interview.  en we stop the exercise.”
 e exercise will probably be humorous and painful at the same time, but there is nothing like stumbling, or watching a team stumble, to realize why best practices are best practices.
76 Talking to Humans
Screwing Up Customer Discovery
So how do people screw up customer discovery? Here are a few anti- patterns:
1. You treat speculation as con rmation
Here are some question types that I don’t like — and if you ask them, you should heavily discount the answer: “would you use this?” “would you pay for this?” “would you like this?”
I can’t say that I never ask these questions, but I always prefer behavioral questions over speculation.
As contrast, here is a behavior-focused interaction: “Tell me about a time when you bought airline tickets online.” “What did you enjoy about the process? What frustrated you about the process?” “What di erent systems or methods have you tried in the past to book tickets?”
2. You lead the witness
Leading the witness is putting the answer in the interviewee’s mouth in the way you ask the question. For example: “We don’t think
most people really want to book tickets online, but what do you think?” Examine both how you phrase your questions and your
tone of voice. Are you steering the answer? Ask open-ended, neutral questions before you drill down: “what was that experience of buying online tickets like?”
3. You just can’t stop talking
Some entrepreneurs can’t help themselves — they are over owing with excitement and just have to pitch pitch pitch.  ere is nothing
Appendix 77
wrong with trying to pre-sell your product — that is an interesting experiment unto itself — but you should not mix this in with behavioral learning.
If you do try to pre-sell, don’t just ask, “Would you pay for this?” but rather ask them to actually pay, and see what happens. Some people ask the question, “How much would you pay for this?” but I do not. Instead, try actually selling at di erent price points (albeit one at a time). I much prefer having the potential customer experience something, rather than speculate over something.
4. You only hear what you want to hear
I see some people go into interviews with strong beliefs about what they like and dislike. When you debrief a er their custdev conversation, it is magical how everything they heard aligns perfectly with their opinions. Our brains are amazing  lters. Leave your agenda at the door before starting a conversation. One way to solve this is to have two people for each interview — one person to ask questions, and the other to take notes.
5. You treat a single conversation as ultimate truth
You’ve just spoken to a potential customer and they have really strong opinions. One instinct is to jump to conclusions and rush to make changes. Instead, you need to be patient.  ere is no de nitive answer for how many similar answers equals the truth. Look for patterns and use your judgement. A clear, consistent pattern at even 5 or 10 people is a signal.
6. Fear of rejection wins out
 is is one of the biggest blockers to people doing qualitative research, in my experience, because of fear of a stranger rejecting your advance or rejecting your idea. Many excuses, such as “I don’t know how to  nd people to talk to,” are rooted in this fear. JFDI. Customer development isn’t just about street intercepts. You can
78 Talking to Humans
recruit people on Craigslist, Facebook and LinkedIn groups, and good old fashioned networking.
7. You talk to anyone with a pulse
I see some teams taking a shotgun approach. Instead, de ne your assumptions around who your customer will be and who your early adopter will be. You might even do a lightweight persona (see the book Lean UX for examples). Zoom in on those people and try to validate or invalidate your assumptions about your customers. It is ok to occasionally go outside your target zone for learning, but don’t boil the ocean. Focus, learn, and pivot if necessary.
8. You wing the conversation
If you go into a conversation unprepared, it will be evident. Write up your questions ahead of time and force-rank them based on the risks and assumptions you are worried about.
To de ne your assumptions, you can answer the questions in the business assumptions exercise (previous section), or do a business model canvas or a lean canvas. Your exact method doesn’t matter as much as the act of prioritizing your risk areas.
During your actual interview, do not literally read your questions from a piece of paper, but rather keep things conversational (remember, you are getting the subject to tell you stories). If you uncover something interesting, follow your nose and don’t be afraid to diverge from your initial priorities.
9. You try to learn everything in one sitting
Rather than trying to go as broad as possible in every conversation, you are actually better o  zooming in on a few areas which are critical to your business. If you have a huge range of questions, do more interviews and split the questions.
10. Only the designer does qualitative research
It is ok to divide and conquer most of the time, but everyone on the team should be forced to get out and talk to real people. Note: you will probably have to coach newcomers on #5’s point about not jumping to conclusions.
11. You did customer development your  rst week, but haven’t felt a need to do it since
It is always sad to see product teams start things o  with customer development, and then completely stop once they get going. It is perfectly  ne to let customer discovery work ebb and  ow. If your learning curve  attens, it can make sense to press pause or change up your approach. However, you want to build a regular qualitative cadence into your product process. It will provide a necessary complement to your quantitative metrics, because it will help you understand the reasons why things are happening.
12. You ask the customer to design your product for you
 ere’s a famous line attributed to Henry Ford, “If I had asked people what they wanted, they would have said faster horses.” Remember, it is not the customer’s job to design the solution. It is your job. It is the customer’s job to tell you if your solution sucks. Get feedback, yes. Remember that the further away you are from a working product, the more you have to  lter what you hear through your judgement and vision.
Disclaimer
As with all tips on lean and agile, there are always places and times to break the rules and do what is right for your context, and your business.
Appendix 79
80 Talking to Humans
Glossary
Concierge and “Wizard of Oz” Experiments
A concierge experiment is where you manually act out your product. An example in Eric Ries’ book  e Lean Startup shows an entrepreneur serving as a personal shopper for people before trying to design an automated solution. When my colleagues were testing a diet plan service, we did not want to rush to so ware before testing our assumptions. Instead, we interviewed participants about their food preferences, manually created meal plans which were emailed to them over two weeks, and interviewed them at various points in the process. At the end of the two weeks, we asked them to pay a set amount to continue, and tracked the conversion rate.
A “Wizard of Oz” experiment is similar, with the di erence being that the manual work is hidden from the customer. For example, another set of colleagues tested an idea for a smart task management system for married couples.  e twenty couples participating in the test thought that they were interacting with a computer system, but in reality they were emailing in to our team, who then processed the emails accordingly. We just said that the servers would be “down” at night!
Minimum Viable Product (MVP)
An MVP is the smallest thing you can create that gives you meaningful learning about your product. MVP is o en used interchangeably with “experiment” in the broader community. I personally tend to reserve it speci cally for tests around the product, and not for experiments related to other business assumptions. It is best to think about MVPs as an ongoing process, rather than a single release. Validation is rarely that neat and tidy.
Scienti c Method
I think the best way to explain the scienti c method is to quote the theoretical physicist, Richard Feynman:
“In general we look for a new law by the following process:  rst we guess it. Don’t laugh -- that’s really true.  en we compute the consequences of the guess to see what, if this law is right, what it would imply.  en we compare those computation results to nature, i.e. experiment and experience. We compare it directly to observation to see if it works.
“If it disagrees with experiment, it’s wrong.  at simple statement is the key to science. It doesn’t make a di erence how beautiful your guess is, it doesn’t make a di erence how smart you are, who made the guess or what his name is -- if it disagrees with experiment, it’s wrong.  at’s all there is to it.” (Cornell lecture, 1964)
It is relatively straightforward to apply the scienti c method to business. You accept that your ideas are hypotheses. You make
them as speci c as possible so that you can guess the results, i.e. the implications, of your hypotheses. You design and run an experiment. If your hypothesized results do not match the results of your experiment, your hypothesis is proven wrong. However, business
is about people, and people are highly complex and inconsistent compared to laws of nature. So if your experiment fails, you will still need to apply judgement about whether the errors are in the hypothesis or in the experiment.
Appendix 81
82 Talking to Humans
Other Learning Resources
Authors
 e two seminal books on the topics of lean innovation and customer development are Steve Blank and Bob Dorf ’s  e Startup Owner’s Manual and Eric Ries’  e Lean Startup.
 ere are a ton of other resources out there, from books to videos and blog posts. Rather than link to particular items and
thus miss out on newer developments, here are a few names that I recommend you pay attention to: Alex Osterwalder, Alistair Croll, Ash Maurya, Ben Yoskowitz, Brant Cooper, Cindy Alvarez, David Bland, Je  Gothelf, Joel Gascoigne, Josh Seiden, Kevin Dewalt, Laura Klein, Patrick Vlaskovits, Rob Fitzpatrick, Salim Virani, and Tristan Kromer.
Talking to Humans Website
On our website talkingtohumans.com, you can get worksheet pdfs and sign up for our email list, where we send occasional notes based on useful resources we discover.
Behind the Book 83
Behind the Book
Talking to Humans was written by Gi  Constable, at the instigation and with the collaboration of Frank Rimalovski of NYU’s Entrepreneurial Institute, and with the wonderful illustrations of Tom Fishburne.
Giff Constable
Gi  Constable (gi constable.com) is
a repeat entrepreneur and currently
the CEO of Neo, a global product innovation consulting company. He has held product design and business roles in six startups, and provided M&A and IPO services to technology  rms while at Broadview/Je eries. He was one of the earliest adopters & bloggers of the Lean Startup movement, co-organizes
the 4,700-person Lean Lessons Learned meetup in New York, and tries to
give back to the entrepreneurial community through mentoring and speaking engagements. He lives outside of New York City with his wife, two children, and an excessively rambunctious retriever.
 
84 Guide to Customer Discovery
Frank Rimalovski
Frank Rimalovski brings over 20
years of experience in technology commercialization, startups and early-stage venture capital investing.
He is executive director of the NYU Entrepreneurial Institute, managing director of the NYU Innovation Venture Fund, Adjunct Faculty at NYU’s Polytechnic School of Engineering,
and an Instructor in the NSF’s I-Corps program, having trained and mentored hundreds of entrepreneurs in customer
development and lean startup methodologies. Previously, he was a founding partner of New Venture Partners, director/entrepreneur-in-residence at Lucent’s New Ventures Group, and has held various positions in product management, marketing and business development at Sun Microsystems, Apple and NeXT. He lives outside of New York City with his wife, two daughters and his increasingly mellow mutt.
Tom Fishburne
Tom Fishburne (marketoonist.com) started drawing cartoons on the backs
of Harvard Business School cases. His cartoons have grown by word of mouth to reach 100,000 business readers a week and have been featured by the Wall Street Journal, Fast Company, and the New York Times. Tom is the Founder and CEO of Marketoon Studios, a content marketing studio that helps businesses such as Google, Kronos, and
Rocketfuel reach their audiences with cartoons. Tom draws from 19 years in the marketing and innovation trenches at Method Products, Nestle, and General Mills. He lives near San Francisco with his wife and two daughters.
  
Like The Book?
When Frank approached me to write this book, we both had the same goal of giving back to the community. We debated charging for the book, and pondered whether the question of free versus paid would a ect how it was perceived. But ultimately, we decided to put it out into the world for free.
Should you like Talking to Humans, and feel a need to contribute back to something, we would encourage you to think about doing one or all of the following:
1. Pay it back (and forward!) by mentoring another student or entrepreneur
2. Donate to one of our favorite causes: Charity: Water, Girls Who Code, Kiva or the NYU Entrepreneurial Institute
3. Share a link to the talkingtohumans.com website or give someone a copy of the book
If this book has helped you in some small way, then that is reward enough for us. It’s why we did it.
Gi  Constable and Frank Rimalovski September 2014 talkingtohumans.com
Behind the Book 85
page intentionally blank
 Acclaim for Talking to Humans
“Talking to Humans is the perfect complement to the existing body of work on customer development. If you are teaching entrepreneurship or running a startup accelerator, you need to make it required reading for your students and teams. I have.”
Steve Blank, entrepreneur and author of The Startup Owner’s Manual
“Getting started on your Customer Discovery journey is the most important step to becoming a successful entrepreneur and reading Talking To Humans is the smartest  rst step to  nding and solving real problems for paying customers.”
Andre Marquis, Executive Director, Lester Center for Entrepreneurship, University of California Berkeley
“If entrepreneurship 101 is talking to customers, this is the syllabus. Talking to Humans is a thoughtful guide to the customer informed product
development that lies at the foundation of successful start-ups.”
Phin Barnes, Partner, First Round Capital
“A lot of entrepreneurs pay lip service to talking to customers but you have to know how. Talking to Humans o ers concrete examples on how to how to recruit candidates, how to conduct interviews, and how to prioritize learning from customers more through listening versus talking.”
Ash Maurya, Founder of Spark59 and author of Running Lean
“When getting ‘out of the building,’ too many people crash and burn right out of the gate and wonder what happened. Talking to Humans is a quick and e ective guide for how Lean Startup interviews should be done.”
Dean Chang, Associate VP for Innovation & Entrepreneurship, University of Maryland
#talkingtohumans talkingtohumans.com
 