Lean startup provides a framework to prove or disprove a series of hypothesis.
Design thinking provides a methodology to generate the hypothesis.
Positive deviance provides a framework to replicate a successful strategy on a larger scale.
In my opinion the three approach are very much connected to each others because they aim to create frameworks to meet customer needs. The main difference, in my opinion, is that Lean Startup and Positive Deviance start with the assumption that the customer need is clear and they represent different strategies to approach it. On the other hand Design Thinking starts with no assumptions about the customer need and tries to create “innovation” thinking about what customers really want / experience.
However I believe that the three methods are very similar in the way that they iterate to improve their results; in particular Design Thinking and Lean Startup rely heavily on an iterative process to generate ideas and prove / disprove them. In addition all three methods are strongly based on the customers’ opinion and perception.
Coming from a Management Consulting where we used very classical approaches to problem solving. I still see that some of the things we did had some common traits with the strategies we studies, such us the iterative process to improve operations and output quality, but also the replication of “success stories” in new clients, using benchmarking as a tool to aim to the best practices known in the market. However management consulting only partially rely on aspects like “empathy” or “emotions”. In fact, most of the times the actual customer experience is considered as less relevant if compared to operations efficiency, and profit (as profit was not driven by the emotion we were transferring to our customers through our organizational culture).
If consultants were not only addressing the problem of their direct clients, but if they were trying to change the final users’ perspective and experience, I believe consulting projects would be much more impactful. What I mean is: if instead of thinking of “capital efficiency” banks were thinking on how to create a value proposition and a positive culture for the people working for the bank, this would enable a different interactions with its customers and this would ultimately effect the bank’s capital positively.
Among the three approaches the most valuable for our project will be “design thinking” and “positive deviance”. In fact in our project we will have to create a new ecosystem and make different organizations start collaborating. This will require a deep understanding of the organizations target consumers and to replicate the aggregation which was observed in other non-profit ecosystems.
Mostly I am looking forward to understand the following:

How do we know we are applying the right approach? They can be pretty similar but they could lead to pretty different results (in particular when I think about Positive Deviance and Design Thinking).
When we use Design Thinking, how do we know we are innovating and creating something useful? How do we measure our success before investing a lot on an idea which might be wrong?
