With a focus on going through multiple iterations in order to arrive at the best possible products or solutions, all three practices require you to build empathy for stakeholders and be comfortable learning from failure. Instead of seeing failure as something to be avoided at all costs, designers, deviants, and lean start-ups must see failure (their own and others) as valuable opportunities to understand what does or doesn't work when addressing wicked problems. However, the lean start-up framework places a premium on efficiency that I don't think is apparent in the other two approaches.
Although standardized testing loomed large in every classroom, Teach for America recognized that existing education solutions were not effectively addressing the gaps in education. As a result, they promoted experimentation with accountability. Teachers were encouraged to try new practices in the classroom, but had to ground their work in data so we could assess the efficacy of new programs. Additionally, teachers have a close attachment to the students and communities they serve so it was natural and easy to empathize through the process. However, this emphasis on experimentation is not seen during TFA's training and onboarding programs, but I think the focus on standardized processes is necessary during training to ensure all teachers are equipped with at least the basic tools for teaching.
For our SSS project, I think that the most valuable approach will be applying design thinking principles. We're looking to explore how to create a leadership development program and I already find myself discarding possibilities because they don't seem realistic. That's probably not the best practice so I'm excited to hold ideation sessions with my team and client so I can learn from the wild ideas they have and hopefully expand my understanding of what might be possible. 
I would love to hear about anyone's experiences using designing thinking to create programs rather than products. It sounds cool when I'm reading about it, but I'm not sure what it looks like in practice. 
 