Design thinking is a human-centered process for problem solving that deeply focuses on the user’s experience. The lean startup method is a hypothesis-driven approach that tests a series of minimum viable products with customers and iterating on them based on customer feedback. Design thinking includes a prototyping and iterating cycle that looks very similar to the lean startup method since both are focused on getting minimum viable products directly to the users and getting feedback to be responsive to user’s actual needs. However, design thinking starts with much more extensive user research to find the actual needs of a user, while the lean startup method begins with a grand vision and a hypothesis that the entrepreneur creates based on a potential problem s/he believes exists. In this way, design thinking shares a similarity with positive deviance – both begin with observation of the end user.  Positive deviance is taking uncommon practices of at risk individuals, that are creating better outcomes, and applying it to others who share similar risks. Unlike design thinking and lean startup, positive deviance requires the users themselves to have created an alternative solution, the practitioner merely applies their solution to a broader user base.
The organizations I have worked with were knowledgeable about both design thinking and lean startup (none have used positive deviance). In technology companies, getting a minimum viable product out has become a best practice, however, some are more “minimum” than others. Because I worked at nonprofits and we were resource constrained (both money and labor), we also had fewer iteration cycles with our technology products than we would have liked based on both design thinking and lean startup models. When it comes to non-tech products and services, it is often difficult to find users or colleagues patient enough to go through multiple iteration cycles. I am curious how we can apply these approaches to our traditional consulting project in Social Sector Solutions where our deliverable is a business plan or evaluation of business opportunities.