Design thinking is mainly concerned with user-centered design—it is now important to think about how the user will interact with the product in many different ways and instead of thinking about it after the fact, it is important to execute in the design process. Positive deviance is a strengths based approach that focuses on solving problems from existing communities. Lean startup focuses on startup companies investing their time into iteratively building products that will meet the needs of customers. Lean startup is focused on doing this early in the process so that it can be focused on consumer needs very early. All of these approaches are looking at focusing on user needs and solving problems early on. They all go through a process of steps that get you to a product or solution.
Positive deviance is what sticks out to me as being most pertinent for my work with Social Sector Solutions—certainly with our organization Berkeley Food Institute. They are concerned with really solving problems out in the community and transforming food systems. With Positive Deviance, I imagin3 you need to really be able to see assets, find positives, and solve problems in a way that is leaning on the resources that exist. Design thinking also has a variety of steps within the process and is really focused and going through those steps a few times, coming back to ground zero and building back up. It’s a way to learn through the design process and get better through that learning. I actually think this process will be essential in S3 because it can be really easy to come up with a consulting answer and then just move forward without coming back and learning from the process. Lean startup will be helpful to get us to a place where we are trying to get the best leadership program early on by pushing customer feedback through our changemaker interviews, but I don’t think it will be as helpful as Positive Deviance or Design Thinking.
The big questions I have is: How do you take different parts of these and apply them to a project? How can we use these without having a real product we are delivering? How do you invest all stakeholders in these processes – which may be slower than what they are used to?