Design thinking, positive deviance, and lean startup methodology all rely on observation to find innovative solutions to existing challenges. Design thinking places a strong focus on observing and building empathy for the user. Both design thinking and lean startup methodology rely on creating prototypes, testing them, and then iterating based on feedback. Lean startup methodology specifies what is required to begin testing (a minimum viable product), and also specifies which test to run first (low cost / high value). Positive deviance involves observing at-risk people with unexpected good outcomes and identifying the positive deviant behavior that could potentially be replicated across a community, The focus on information-gathering links this approach to design thinking. However, what sets positive deviance apart from design thinking and lean startup methodology is its emphasis on finding existing solutions to problems; rather than creating new solutions and testing them, people using this approach look for the people within a community who are already solving this problem through unusual behaviors.
I have been lucky to work in organizations that placed a strong focus on both design thinking and positive e deviance. At the school where I worked, we used the design thinking process to generate solutions to some of our toughest challenges – for instance, What might a lunch block that strengthens students’ bodies, minds, relationships, and social intelligence look like? While this process generated some amazing solutions, it was also challenging to implement in a high-intensity, high-stakes environment where people are working hard just to keep the lights on, so to speak. Design thinking requires a tolerance for ambiguity, and it takes time… when you’re working in a setting like an urban school, where the needs of your users are intense and immediate and the time of your practitioners is limited, this can be a lot to ask for. We found it worked best to do this at the end of the school year, when high-stakes testing was over and summer vacation for teachers was in sight.
Educational settings also make frequent use of positive deviance- this involves finding the teachers who are experiencing success in a challenging setting, figuring out what they are doing different, and then intentionally replicating those best practices across a community. This method, like positive deviance, relies on social mobilization (motivating teachers to share their best practices), information gathering (observing classrooms to identify bright spots), and behavior change (when best practices “ripple” through a school). Like positive deviance, this strategy demands a fundamental belief that solutions already exist in the community. Schools that take a deficit-approach to teacher development (i.e. assuming that teachers are empty vessels that need to be filled with teaching knowledge) tend to struggle with spreading best practices in this way.
I think the nonprofit I am working with from S3 would benefit from the lean startup methodology. While they have used design thinking to create their coaching app for students, they are seeing only uneven success with users. Rather than betting on (and investing in) a particular iteration of this app, I wonder if they would benefit of iterating and testing out more versions of it.
A question I have for my classmates is: how do you balance how time-consuming, costly, and uncertain these methodologies can be with the fact that organizations facing the biggest challenges tend to lack time, money, and human resources? Is design thinking a luxury for those who aren’t facing the most pressing problems?