Design Thinking, Lean Startup, and Positive Deviance methodologies all begin on the premise that modern life and technology make it impossible for people to accept and use innovations that appear to add to the complexity - and thus a successful innovation must manage to cut through complexity in order to be successful. At first read, these processes all seemed to be quite similar. For example, they all aim to achieve relatively restrained outcomes in comparison with more complex products and services that might have been developed with “traditional” development methods. However, after looking through them again, it seems that they are vastly different approaches to problem solving, appropriate for different kinds of entrepreneurs, learners, thinkers, and teams. 
To rephrase, each method aims to add value to the venture through iteration, prototyping, “fast failures,” in order to distill the critical elements of the venture that are actually important. But the actual processes and inputs into decision making are very different for each method. 
In the Lean Startup method, the hypothesis-driven process, in its steps to determine whether a hypothesis should “persevere, pivot or perish,” is appropriate in a competitive setting where time is of the essence and all of the human observation inputs have been examined. The Lean Startup seems equally focused on cutting through the complex process of launching a venture as it is with developing a streamlined, usable product or service. It also is a framework through which people of all professional backgrounds can buy into and participate in the process of rapid creation, without getting too stuck on the “creativity” part. 
Design thinking, by contrast, comes from a very different starting point. Rather than being product-oriented, it is focused on identifying what people really value about a product or service, and designing to achieve that. It aims to find the “emotional resonance” - what touches, intangibly, the experiences and aspirations that people have - as much as the actual utility. Its tendency to promote “tinkering” is a very different approach to prototyping than found in the Lean Startup method. While the Lean Startup seems to be about continually fleshing out and identifying risk, Design Thinking embraces risk a bit more, and leaves room for ambiguity. 
Positive Deviance is like finding the needle in the human haystack. It strikes me as a method that would take me much longer than either other method to achieve a potential outcome. Positive Deviance is a process that people in development settings should all be aware of, so in their work they may be able to identify possibilities as they get to know a community well. But to go and actively seek outliers is inherently problematic, especially from an “outsider” coming into a community, as there is little chance that the observer understands the complex dynamics of that community that may be contributing to the positive outcome. That it “introduces a generic approach for local problem solving” is questionable - there is no generic approach to local problem solving. 
in the piece on the Lean Startup, it described an alternative mentality, the “Just Do It” approach, which I am extremely familiar with. This was a constant refrain from my former boss, the founder of E*Trade and the International Securities Exchange. This worked for him for two reasons. The first was that he was a true visionary on the edge of innovation - E*Trade was the first online platform for consumers to trade in stocks. Once they had competition (and it came fast), they would have benefited from these processes in order to improve their innovation process. But they were able to muscle through both ventures because they truly saw the potential in a different way. The second reason was that it suited his personality: he was not one for tinkering or iterating. He was the type of person who said it once and wanted it done. 
 
 
 
 
 
 