I think the three methods of thinking are similar in that they focus on employing quick, low-cost strategies to solve problems so that they can get feedback as soon and as often as possible to iterate. They are all centered around using people to validate assumptions. I think where they differ the most is the starting point - “lean startup” begins with an idea or vision to validate, “design thinking” begins with a human need or pain point, and “positive deviance” begins with discovering unlikely outcomes for individuals. As such, the subsequent tests and prototypes are based on different starting points and frames of reference. 
 
When I worked at an edtech startup, I employed both design thinking and lean startup principles when developing new product features. First, I would visit classrooms across the country and talk to teachers about their biggest pain points and observe their behavior (and that of their students). From those insights, I would develop mock slides of potential features that I thought could meet needs I saw, and test these early prototypes for feedback. I would ask probing questions to understand what teachers expected the feature could do and how they might use it. From there, I worked with the development team to create an MVP, focusing on getting feedback at every possible development decision step. 
 
When I worked for the Boston Public Schools, I think these mindsets would have been very valuable, as we often focused on requirements, structures, and systems already in place, instead of thinking more about the opportunities that existed and the needs of teachers and students that the district might be able to meet. 
 
Since my project is about college persistence, I think positive deviance could provide some interesting insights about resources and tools that first generation students are currently using to beat the odds and graduate, and see how our client could build those into their existing product and services to help other students. I also think design thinking will be very useful because we will be doing lots of stakeholder interviews to better understand the needs and pain points of higher ed institutions as they pertain to student retention. 
I have a question about how to employ positive deviance in a sensitive and appropriate way. For example, what is the best way to find outliers and ask questions about their success without implying that they were unlikely to succeed in college? How do you encourage people to talk to you and allow you to ask in depth and sometimes personal questions?