Design thinking, lean startup, and positive deviance all start from a common premise--rather than imposing a pre-designed, one-size-fits-all solution on an intended audience of customers, begin from a position of curiosity. At heart, all of these approaches imply that the customer knows more about his or her life and needs than the person providing the 'solution.' Positive deviance goes farthest in this assumption, actually sourcing in-action ideas and solutions from within the community it seeks to serve. In design thinking, empathy with the end user and her needs is also seen as a starting point for useful experimentation. Although I think this might vary, as described in the Lean Startup paper, this methodology seems to rely on seeking consumer insights mostly after the "vision" is first established.Despite being on a spectrum of consumer-centricity, all three methodologies require that the practitioner remain open to solutions that are not her own; they require the practice of humility and some risk-taking (putting a potentially false idea, prototype, MVP out into the world). On the creativity spectrum, lean startup and design thinking require a good bit of outside the box thinking, generating new and unthoughtof ideas, whereas positive deviance is more about sourcing ideas through empathy.The last organization I worked for was a startup that utilized design thinking in our product design cycle (that is, in designing new features for our website). It was a constant back-and-forth, however, because our business model was already somewhat fixed due to capital investment. This led to tension between really developing a solution that would meet customers' needs and maintaining operational processes already in place.  Fundamentally, I think our product team was willing to take risks and have empathy with customers, whereas teams like operations felt more embedded in logistics and had less time and openness to questioning the status quo. We did come up with potential solutions, such as asking all teams to conduct customer interviews, but again, certain functions within a business (especially past the true startup phase) seem less able to incorporate this thinking, because their roles and goals are fundamentally different.In our project, I am interested in thinking through the lens of positive deviance. Our client wants to understand how best to serve emerging leaders; to me, looking at how current leaders have helped themselves in the past, and understanding the "nourishment" they find absent of intervention can help us identify the resources our client has and could pass on to these leaders.Mostly, I am looking forward to hearing others' experiences with design thinking and other approaches!