All three approaches, “design thinking”, "positive deviance" and “lean start-up” appear to be similar in that they require one key valuable skill, patience. Take positive defiance for example, it emphasizes process over efficiency and is very interactive and hence users of this approach ought to be very patient. The same case applies to lean start-ups in that, unlike traditional start-ups where founders “build and market products before they have resolved business uncertainty, it requires the founder to invest time in learning how to build sustainable business models. The note on lean start-up seems to validate this point by noting that a lean start-up only invests after its “business model has been validated through fast and frugal tests”. Design thinking, compared to the traditional way of problem solving where we jump to the first branch and start providing a solution requires great patience in that one has to keep on digging to various branches of the responses received before providing a solution.
I worked in a highly-regulated industry, public accounting and I am not sure the extent to which we used some of these approaches. Having said that, I do think that these firms could incorporate more design thinking in their service delivery.
In our S3 project, we have been tasked to help a nonprofit that provides financial assistance to talented kids from low income families to attend college to come up with a 3-year strategic plan. Among the things that need to be addressed in the plan are financial and other implications of increasing the number of students receiving financial assistance. It appears to me that the hypothesis approach is the most valuable in developing the plan for our client. This is because we have the mission of what the nonprofit aspires to achieve – improve the welfare of the community by empowering youth through college education. To see how the client can continue achieve its mission, we have developed testable hypotheses including the client does not enough funds to support additional scholars. The idea is that once we prove this hypothesis, we will be able to recommend in the strategic plan that in order for the organization to be able to expand its outreach, i.e. supporting more scholars, it will need to raise more funds.