Positive deviance is an approach to behavioral and social change based on the observation that in any community there are people whose uncommon but successful behaviors or strategies enable them to find better solutions to a problem than their peers, despite facing similar challenges and having no extra resources or knowledge than their peers. These individuals are referred to as positive deviants.
Design thinking refers to creative strategies designers utilize during the process of designing. Design thinking is also an approach that can be used to consider issues and resolve problems more broadly than within professional design practice, and has been applied in business and to social issues.
Lean startup is a methodology for developing businesses and products. The methodology aims to shorten product development cycles by adopting a combination of business-hypothesis-driven experimentation, iterative product releases, and validated learning. The central hypothesis of the lean startup methodology is that if startup companies invest their time into iteratively building products or services to meet the needs of early customers, they can reduce the market risks and sidestep the need for large amounts of initial project funding and expensive product launches and failures.
These three thought processes all aim to think about problems in a different, unorthodox or creative solution.  Each need someone who is willing to "question the status quo" to achieve results not thought achievable.  They differ in the sense that each are focused or used by separate spaces in the social, non-profit and for-profit sectors.  
I'm curious to hear my experiences from my classmates in the social impact and for-profit sector.  Specifically, how prevalent are any of these practices in large corporations?  I come from a military background where some design thinking and positive deviance have been used.  I have seen them at lower levels where resources are constrained and time is of the essence.  This is usually in a deployed environment when you have the autonomy to make decisions independently of higher authority.  For example, while in Afghanistan, I was given the responsibility to figure out the best way to get rid of tens of millions of dollars worth of antiquated or unnecessary communications equipment.  Using the given system, along with some ingenuity, we were able to properly dispose of all the equipment 3 months ahead of schedule.
Are there any social or private sector examples?  What was the outcome?  